Qual Quant (2018) 52:313–354
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0469-8

An overview of structural equation modeling: its
beginnings, historical development, usefulness
and controversies in the social sciences
Piotr Tarka1

Published online: 9 January 2017
 The Author(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract This paper is a tribute to researchers who have significantly contributed to
improving and advancing structural equation modeling (SEM). It is, therefore, a brief
overview of SEM and presents its beginnings, historical development, its usefulness in the
social sciences and the statistical and philosophical (theoretical) controversies which have
often appeared in the literature pertaining to SEM. Having described the essence of SEM in
the context of causal analysis, the author discusses the years of the development of
structural modeling as the consequence of many researchers’ systematically growing needs
(in particular in the social sciences) who strove to effectively understand the structure and
interactions of latent phenomena. The early beginnings of SEM models were related to the
work of Spearman and Wright, and to that of other prominent researchers who contributed
to SEM development. The importance and predominance of theoretical assumptions over
technical issues for the successful construction of SEM models are also described. Then,
controversies regarding the use of SEM in the social sciences are presented. Finally, the
opportunities and threats of this type of analytical strategy as well as selected areas of SEM
applications in the social sciences are discussed.
Keywords Structural equation modeling  Development and usefulness of SEM 
Controversies of SEM  Areas of applications in social science research

1 Introduction
One of the main goals of research in the social sciences, i.e., in the context of recognizing
particular concepts and events, is to explain and to predict, in a valid manner, the specific
behavior of an individual, group of people or organization. Researchers, by recognizing a

& Piotr Tarka
piotr.tarka@ue.poznan.pl
1

Department of Market Research, Poznan University of Economics, al. Niepodleglosci 10,
61-875 Poznan, Poland

123

314

P. Tarka

number of conditions in which the individual, society or organization exists, can, within
certain limits, identify particular development trends and describe the details concerning
their existential sphere. As a result, researchers can define and discover the vital factors and
relationships which set trends in a given society. However, the goal of the social sciences is
not only to conduct an elementary statistical description and to recognize individual factors
and behaviors (which are involved in a specific social situation), but also to determine the
cause-effect linkages among the scientific areas (i.e., variables) of interest. Because of the
complexity of social reality, i.e., the latent character of many social phenomena, sophisticated methods and techniques of statistical data analysis are required, both of which refer
to causal analysis and the procedures of encompassing many variables based on Structural
Equation Modeling—SEM. In the statistical sense, this model refers to a set of equations
with accompanying assumptions of the analyzed system, in which the parameters are
determined on the basis of statistical observation. Thus, structural equations refer to
equations using parameters in the analysis of the observable or latent variables (Jöreskog
and Sörbom 1993). In the latter case of variables, their examples could be such theoretical
constructs as: intelligence, alienation, discrimination, socialization, motives of human
behavior, personal fulfillment, aggression, frustrations, conservatism, anomie, satisfaction,
or attitudes. In the economic sense, these can also be: prosperity of a geographic region,
social-economic status, satisfaction from purchased products, approval of products, and
improvement of economic conditions. All in all, the measurement of such latent constructs
is conducted indirectly, mostly with the use of a set of observable variables and via
observation of the causal effects in SEM between respective latent variables.

2 Spearman’s factor analysis as a primary source of structural equation
modeling development
The dissemination and development of structural modeling (SEM) was the consequence of
the growing needs of both academic researchers and social science practitioners who were
looking for effective methods in order to understand the structure and interactions of latent
phenomena. For years, human motivations have been the source of development for many
analytical procedures, thus the early beginnings of SEM development should be reconstructed indirectly on the basis of Spearman’s works (1904, 1927), as he laid the foundations for SEM by constructing the first factor model which later became an important
measurement part of the more general SEM analytical strategy. Spearman (1904) is often
cited in the literature as the founding father of factor analysis, even though one year earlier
Pearson (1901a) published a paper on fitting planes by orthogonal least squares, which was
the foundation for principal component analysis that was also applied to the analysis of
correlation matrices by Hotelling (1933). What Spearman did exactly was to measure
general cognitive abilities in humans by using models of the so-called factor analysis. In
his work he claimed that observable statistical relationships among disparate cognitive test
scores can reflect latent levels of human intelligence that are common for all tests and
specific intelligence factors related to each test score. Then he specified a two-factor theory
of intelligence in which all mental processes involved a general factor and a specific factor.
Therefore, Spearman’s work (1904) marked the beginning of the development of factor
models which later became the key for the construction of measurement models used in
SEM. Although in his research Spearman focused on the ‘factor model’, his pioneering
works gave meaning to and revolutionized the thinking of many researchers about the

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

315

measurement of latent variables which, in light of the True Score Theory (see Gulliksen
1950), can today be viewed as a peculiar constraint in the context of the measurement due
to random and nonrandom errors.
Thurstone (1935) criticized Spearman’s work because it was mainly focused on the twofactor theory. Thurstone noted that a vanishing tetrad difference implies a vanishing
second-order determinant of the matrix of observable variables, and therefore decided to
extend it to the vanishing of higher-order determinants as a condition for more than one
factor. Later he generalized the result as the number of common factors that was determined by the rank of the matrix of observables (Harman 1960). Next, Thurstone (1935)
developed the centroid method of factoring a correlation matrix (as a pragmatic compromise to the computationally-burdensome principle axis method). Moreover, he developed a definition of a simple structure for factor analysis based on five principles (the most
important of which was to minimize negative loadings and maximize zero loadings) to
facilitate interpretation and to insure that the loadings were invariant to the inclusion of
other items. From that moment on all scholars’ main interest in the domain of factor
analysis were directed at various methods of rotation, such as Kaiser’s (1958) Varimax
orthogonal rotation. Thurstone also contributed to the idea of rotation, which was based on
the oblique solution allowing factors to be correlated, but in reality it was credited to
Jennrich and Sampson (1966), who developed a computational method of achieving an
oblique rotation. Jennrich, while collaborating with Clarkson (1980), also diagnosed
standard errors of the rotated loadings. In the end, the problem with factor rotation was
solved when confirmatory factor analysis was invented, in which the number of common
factors (latent variables) and the pattern of loadings (including constraints set on the
loadings) could be specified in advance.
To sum up, Spearman’s works did not refer to the statistical assumptions of hypothesis
testing in terms of determining the structure of a factor model but to intuitive theoretical
assumptions of the investigated phenomenon. Other works, which in later years contributed
to the development of factor analysis, generally concerned such issues as the multiple
factor model (Thurstone 1935, 1938, 1947), the scope of knowledge used by the researcher
before the rotation of factors (Mosier 1939), and statistically optimal methods of factor
extraction (Lawley 1940), constraints imposed on the factor models, e.g., by setting the
factor loadings to zero (Anderson and Rubin 1956; Lawley 1958). Finally, thanks to the
work of Tucker (1966), the differentiation between exploratory and confirmatory factor
analysis appeared for the first time in the literature. Also, at that time the first studies on the
structure of covariance (Wilks 1946; Votaw 1948) were conducted.

3 Wright’s path analysis and early years of SEM growth as an analytical
strategy
Real works concerning the idea of Structural Equation Modeling were actually initiated by
Wright (1918, 1921, 1934, 1960a, b),1 a geneticist who used an approach based on path
analysis with the structural coefficients estimated on the basis of the correlation of
observable variables, although he also worked with latent variables. What truly made
Wright develop path analysis was the fact that he was dissatisfied with the results of the
partial correlation analysis that was being conducted which remained far from a causal
explanation. Consequently, he developed path analysis to impose a causal structure, with
1

Wright’s publication released in (1918) referred to issues of modeling the size of animal (rabbit) bones.

123

316

P. Tarka

structural coefficients, on the observed correlations. However, Wright was not only an
originator of path analysis as the analytical strategy but also the originator of either a
graphic or diagrammatic representation of relations between variables included in this type
of analysis. By constructing path diagrams he was able to quickly decompose the correlations into various causal sources, such as direct effects, indirect effects, common causes,
and the like. Thus thanks to his research it was possible to identify total, direct and indirect
causal effects, although initially in Wright’s models the causal flow was assessed from the
perspective of only one direction, which means that the models of that time had a recursive
character. To sum up, his main contribution was to present, in a path diagram, how
correlations between variables can be linked with model parameters. Then he showed how
the equations of the model can be used to estimate direct, indirect, and total effects of one
variable influencing the other variable.
In 1960 Wright (1960a, b) expanded the methods of finding model correlations, which
marked the beginning of non-recursive models, that had previously been developed in the
field of econometrics (Frish and Waugh 1933; Frish 1934; Haavelmo 1943). The nonrecursive models assumed the simultaneous influence of a few variables on other variables
with possible feedback loops as well as disturbance covariances (see the works of Klein
1950; Goldberger 1964; Theil 1971). Finally, among Wright’s models there appeared a
model of multiple causal indicators (later known as the MIMIC model). Wright’s estimation method was essentially a method of moments which followed the intuitive principle
of estimating a population moment by using the sample analog moment. Although Wright
lacked a principle for reconciling multiple ways of expressing a path coefficient in terms of
sample moments in overidentified models, he did check to see if they were close and
acknowledged the potential gains in efficiency and reduced standard errors from using full
information (Matsueda 2012). Interestingly, Wright’s work was long ignored by some
statisticians, as he was criticized for introducing the differentiation between causes and
correlations. This criticism came mainly from statisticians centered around Pearson and
Fisher’s school of statistics.
Econometrics, on the basis of Wright’s work, introduced a rigorous condition of
meeting the requirements concerning the correct formulation and estimation of SEM
models (Li 1975). This issue was particularly focused on problems of model identification
(Koopmans 1949; Wald 1950) and on alternative methods of SEM parameter estimation
(Goldberger 1972). The SEM approach in econometrics was mainly promoted by Haavelmo (1943), Koopmans (1945), and Frisch and Waugh (1933). These scholars made a
milestone in providing an understanding of the principles of SEM by defining the
‘structural relation’ as ‘the theoretical relation postulated a priori’ in a single-equation
multivariate linear model in which the partial regression coefficient represented a ‘structural coefficient’. Frisch (1934) was, however, sceptic of the use of probability models for
economic data, which were rarely the result of a sampling process, and of OLS (Ordinary
Least Squares) regression, because measurement errors existed not only in the dependent
variables but also in the independent variables. Frisch treated observable variables as
fallible indicators of the latent variables to distinguish ‘true relations’ from ‘confluent
relations’. Haavelmo (1943, 1944), on the other hand, contributed to the development of
SEM by specifying a probability model for econometric models and concisely described
the Neyman–Pearson (1933) approach to hypothesis testing by using the probability
approach for estimation, testing, and forecasting. He also distinguished between two
models of the source of stochastic components, i.e., errors-in-variables models, as
emphasized by Frisch (1934), and random shock models, as introduced by Slutsky (1937).
This framework is often defined as the ‘‘probabilistic revolution’’ in econometrics and has

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

317

had a lasting impact on the field, particularly in cementing the Neyman-Pearson approach
to inference over others, such as Bayesian approaches. Finally, Haavelmo (1943, 1944)
advanced SEM by proving that OLS estimates are biased in a two-equation supply–demand
model and distinguished between the structure for equations and what Mann and Wald
(1943) termed as the reduced-form equation. He applied the maximum likelihood (ML)
estimation to the system of equations, showing its equivalence to OLS when applied to the
reduced form, and further specified the necessary conditions for identification in terms of
partial derivatives of the likelihood function (Matsueda 2012). Later, Koopmans et al.
(1950), who also worked in the ‘Cowles Commission’,2 helped to solve major problems of
identification, estimation, and testing of SEM models.
In another field of science, namely in sociology, Blalock (1961a, b, 1963, 1964, 1971),
taking inspiration from the works of biometricians and econometricians, made the first
attempts to combine the simplicity of presentation which path analysis offered with the
rules of defining equation systems that were used in econometrics. In the sociological
literature, however, the main credits was ascribed to Duncan (1966), who worked on the
problems of correlations and their applications in path analysis to recursive models based
on class values, occupational prestige, and synthetic cohorts.3 Later, in 1975, Duncan
authored an excellent text for path analysis and structural equation models in which he
echoed Frisch and Haavalmo’s concept of autonomy—‘‘the structural form is that of
parameterization, in which the coefficients are relatively unmixed, invariant, and autonomous’’ (Duncan 1975; p. 151). He also distinguished between forms of social change from
trivial changes in sampling or exogenous variables (which leave the structural coefficients
intact), to deeper changes in the structural coefficients (which provide an understanding for
the explanation of SEM models) and changes in the model’s structure itself, and provided
important hints for applying the structural models. As he claimed (Duncan 1975; p. 150),
‘‘researchers should not undertake the study of structural equation models in the hope of
acquiring a technique that can be applied technically to a set of numerical data with the
expectation that the result will automatically be researched’’.
Blalock (1969) concentrated in his work mainly on multiple-indicator causal models, in
particular attempting to find tetrad-difference restrictions on observed correlations that
provide a way of testing the models. Blalock (1961a, b; p. 191) also stressed that ‘‘path
analysis can be boiled down to sciences in which there are no strict rules of using experiments’’, although this statement will be questioned later in the literature (see the next sections). Finally, Blalock, while working on the causal models, elaborated Simon’s (1954)
approach of making causal inferences from correlational data. The latter author (Simon 1954;
p. 41) argued that ‘‘determination of whether a partial correlation is or is not spurious can only
be reached if a priori assumptions are made that certain other causal relations do not hold
among the variables’’. Simon (1954) described these conditions in all possible three-variable
models, which were extended by Blalock (1961b, 1962) to a four-variable model.
Finally, in psychology, SEM as an analytical strategy was introduced successively,
mainly thanks to the works of Werts and Linn (1969), and Issac (1970). However, their
2

Wright and other statisticians attempted to promote path analysis methods at Cowles (then the University
of Chicago). However, statisticians at the University of Chicago identified many faults with path analysis
applications to the social sciences—faults which did not pose any significant problems for identifying gene
transmission in Wright’s context but which made path methods problematic in the social sciences. Wright’s
path analysis never gained a large following among US econometricians, but it was successful in influencing
Hermann Wold (1956) and his student Karl Jöreskog.

3

Linear causal analysis had been introduced in sociology about one year earlier by the European scholar
Boudon (1965).

123

318

P. Tarka

works did not cause any breakthrough interest of psychologists at that time around the
SEM strategy because the assumptions of SEM models were technically complex and few
researchers were able to understand them. Psychology, and more specifically psychometrics, marked the beginning of SEM models, but indirectly by laying the theoretical
grounds for the Classical Test Theory (CTT) and measurement models. In fact, psychology
developed a more theoretical background for factor analysis.

4 Influence of computer software on structural equation modeling
Although considerable growth of interest in SEM models was caused largely thanks to the
works of Goldberger (1971, 1972) and to the publication titled Structural Equation Models in
Social Sciences (Goldberger and Duncan 1973), which was the effect of an interdisciplinary
conference organized in 1970 featuring economists, sociologists, psychologists, statisticians,
and political scientists (from the Social Science Research Council) that was devoted to issues
of structural equation models, in practice the true development of structural models results
from the dynamic development of statistical software and synthetic combination of measurement models with structural models, which was expanded in the field of psychometrics
and econometrics. Interestingly, although the methodological concepts related to SEM which
appeared in the works of Jöreskog (1970, 1973), Keesling (1972) and Wiley (1973) were
independently proposed (i.e., the studies were simultaneously conducted by the three
researchers), in the literature mainly Jöreskog (1973) has been credited with the development
of the first SEM model (including computer software (LISREL).
The LISREL was the first computer project; however, Jöreskog along with two other
authors (Gruavaeus and van Thillo) had previously invented the ACOVS, which was a
general computer program for the analysis of covariance structures (Jöreskog et al. 1970).
Thus the ACOVS was virtually a precursor of the LISREL (Jöreskog and Sörbom 1978).
Moreover, work on the LISREL actually began in 1972, when Jöreskog left the Educational
Testing Service at Princeton University to take over a professorship position in statistics at the
University of Uppsala in Sweden. His academic colleague, Sörbom, prepared all of the
programming schemas in the LISREL and developed the method to estimate latent means.
However, before he began his work Jöreskog profited from Hauser and Goldberger’s book
chapter (1971) on the examination of unobservable variables which was, at that time, an
exemplar of cross-disciplinary integration and which drew on path analysis and moment
estimators (from Wright and other sociologists), factor models (from psychometrics), and
efficient estimation and Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing (from statistics and econometrics). Hauser and Goldberger focused on the theory of limited information estimation by
trying to disclose the real facts behind the model system of structural equations as estimated
by maximum likelihood. Jöreskog (1973) summarized their approach, presented the maximum likelihood framework for estimating SEM, and developed the above-mentioned computer software for empirical applications. Furthermore, he showed how the general model
could be applied to a myriad of important substantive models.
A general advantage of the model proposed by Jöreskog was the explicit possibility of
practical application, as the general model at that time contained all linear models that had
been specified so far. In other words, the model’s usefulness was in its generality and in the
possibilities it offered in practical applications. The first sub-model resembled the
econometric configuration of simultaneous equations but was designed for latent variables,
whereas the second sub-model was a measurement model which included latent variable
indices just as in the psychometric theory of factor analysis. Simultaneously, apart from its

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

319

being universal, the structural model was expressed in the form of matrices containing
model parameters. Thus the model could be successfully applied in many individual
research problems (Jöreskog 1973). Finally, Jöreskog (1971) also generalized his model
and virtually all of his academic papers to estimate the model in multiple populations
showed how the LISREL could be applied to simultaneous equations, MIMIC models,
confirmatory factor models, panel data, simplex models, growth models, variance and
covariance components, and factorial designs. In the following years this model evolved
into further alternative solutions, such as COSAN—Covariance Structure Analysis
(McDonald 1978), LINEQS—Linear Equation Model (Bentler and Weeks 1980), RAM—
Reticular Action Model (McArdle and McDonald 1984), EzPath (Steiger 1989), or
RAMONA (now a part of SYSTAT software—see the work of Browne and Mels 1990).
Besides the LISREL, the real boom in SEM software development came along with
many other commercial computer packages, such as EQS (Bentler 1985), LISCOMP,
which was renamed MPLUS (Muthén 1987a; Muthén and Muthén 1998), AMOS (Arbuckle and Wothke 1999), PROC CALIS (in SAS), HLM (Bryk et al. 1996), SIMPLIS
(Jöreskog and Sorböm 1996), and GLAMM (Rabe-Hesketh et al. 2004; Skrondal and
Rabe-Hesketh 2004), as well as freeware packages related to an R (open source) statistical
environment, such as OpenMX (Development Team 2011), SEM package (Fox 2006), or
LAVAAN (Rosseel 2012). The common advantage of all of this software is that it offers
highly advanced and fast-speed computational solutions, e.g., in conducting the simulation
of experimental plans, and allows to more precisely confirm the correlations between the
analyzed variables, together with the available possibility of testing cause-effect relationships, e.g. Bentler’s EQS software (1985) can be applied on the basis of syntax. In
contrast, in AMOS the path diagram’s flexible graphical interface can be used instead of
syntax. OpenMx, which runs as a package under R and consists of a library of functions
and optimizers, supports the rapid and flexible implementation and estimation of SEM
models. In consequence, it allows for estimation of models based on either raw data (with
FIML modeling) or on correlation or covariance matrices. OpenMx can also handle
mixtures of continuous and ordinal data (Neale et al. 2016). Likewise as OpenMX, the
SEM package provides basic structural equation modeling facilities in R and includes the
ability to fit structural equations into observed variable models via the two-stage least
squares procedure and to fit latent variable models via full information maximum likelihood assuming multivariate normality. Finally, with the LAAVAN package a large variety
of multivariate statistical models can be estimated, including path analysis, confirmatory
factor analysis, structural equation modeling and latent growth curve models.
Many of the above advancements in software took place at a time when the automated
computing process offered substantial upgrades over the existing calculator and analog
computing methods that were available then. Admittedly, advances in computer technology have enabled many professionals, as well as novices, to apply structural equation
methods to very intensive analyses based on large datasets which refer to often complex,
unstructured problems (see the discussion in the work of Westland 2015).

5 Progress in SEM model parameter estimation methods
While the early 1970s were characterized by achievements in generalizing and synthesizing models developed in econometrics, sociometrics, psychometrics and biometrics, the
late 1970s and 1980s made a huge advancement in parameter estimation methods.

123

320

P. Tarka

However, we must remember that early applications of path analysis were based only on ad
hoc methods in the estimation of model parameters. The formal approach to the estimation
of an SEM model is owed to the work of Goldberger (1964), who developed the characteristics of estimators for models with observable variables, and to statisticians such as
Anderson and Rubin (1956), Lawley (1967) as well as Jöreskog (1969, 1970, 1973). Also
Bock and Bergman (1966) developed covariance structure analysis in estimating the elements of covariance of observable variables having multidimensional, normal distribution
and a latent character.
Anderson and Rubin (1956) created a limited information maximum likelihood estimator for parameters of a single structural equation which indirectly included a two-stage
least squares estimator and its asymptotic distribution.4 However, as Browne argued
(Browne 2000b, p. 663), ‘‘the computational procedures were not available until the nested
algorithms involving eigenvalues and eigenvectors and imposing inequality constraints on
unique variance estimates were discovered independently by Jöreskog (1969) and by
Jennrich and Robinson (1969)’’. Jöreskog (1973), in his breakthrough article, proposed use
of the maximum likelihood estimator but, as he himself admitted, a numerical procedure
for obtaining the ML estimates under certain special cases had first been delivered by
Howe (1955) and Lawley (1940, 1943, 1958). This procedure was also related to confirmatory factor models (Lawley and Maxwell 1963).
The ML estimator was often a subject of criticism in the literature because of the
unrealistic assumptions of the continuous observable, the latent variables (e.g., multivariate
normal distributions), and the large sample sizes which were needed to meet the asymptotic properties of this estimator and efficient testing. In the last case, although large
sample sizes may generally provide sufficient statistical power (see e.g., Kaplan 1995) and
precise estimates in SEM, there is no clear consensus among scholars as to the appropriate
methods determining adequate sample size in SEM. In the literature, only selective
guidelines have appeared (on the basis of conducted simulation studies, e.g., Bentler and
Chou 1987; collected professional experience, MacCallum et al. 1996; or developed
mathematical formulas, Westland 2010) to determine appropriate sample size. Most of
them refer to problems associated with the number of observations falling per parameter,
the number of observations required for fit indices to perform adequately, and the number
of observations per degree of freedom.
Another issue is the effect of categorization of observable variables (e.g., on a Likert
scale) which one can often encounter in social studies. Boomsma (1983) argued that
although the SEM models, i.e., their estimators, behave more or less properly for samples
exceeding 200 observations, the skewness of the categorized variables may cause problems, such as spurious measurement error correlations and biased standardized coefficients.
This ‘abnormality’ helped to promote two scholars, Browne and Muthén, among the
academic society. The former proposed a generalized least squares estimator (GLS) which
allowed to release some of the ML’s strict assumptions (Browne 1974), however, it was the
further work of Browne (1982, 1984) that turned out to be particularly vital. Browne
contributed to SEM mainly by developing an asymptotic distribution-free estimator ADF
(otherwise known as WLS—Weighted Least Estimator) in which he presented the
asymptotic covariance matrix and asymptotic Chi-square test statistic as well as an estimator for elliptical distributions which had zero skewness but the kurtosis departed from
4

The two-stage least squares algorithm was originally proposed by Theil (1953a, b) and more or less
independently by Basmann (1957) and Sargan (1958) as a method of estimating the parameters of a single
structural equation in a system of linear simultaneous equations.

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

321

multivariate normality. Browne’s ADF estimator (1984) was further included in Bentler
EQS software (1985) and other software, and examined on the basis of finite sample
properties, e.g., the findings indicated that the ADF estimator behaved best in very large
samples (1000, 2000), which in the end turned out to be a disadvantage of the estimator
itself, as researchers rarely conduct studies that include samples of that size in the social
sciences (e.g., in survey research).
The works of Browne (1984) became a crucial element in the development of models
with ordinal, limited, and discrete variables, whose original creator was Muthén
(1983, 1984). The success of Muthén’s approach lay in the estimation of scale-appropriate
correlation coefficients (e.g., polychoric and polyserial) and then in the application of
Browne’s ADF estimator (1984).5 Then researchers could bind, for example, the ordinal
variable with a normally-distributed continuous latent variable through the so-called
threshold model. Simultaneously, work was continued on factor models for dichotomous
variables, e.g., Bock and Lieberman (1970) used tetrachoric correlations and an ML
estimator for a single factor model, and Christofferson (1975) generalized this to multiple
factors using a GLS estimator (see also Muthén 1978). Muthén (1979) subsequently
developed a multiple-indicator structural probit model, while Winship and Mare (1983)
showed how to apply multivariate probit models (estimated by ML) to multiple-indicator
structural equation models and path analysis.
In the past decade a large number of simulations appeared allowing to identify the
characteristics of the distribution of variables which may influence the empirical behavior
of estimators in relatively small research samples (Boomsma and Hoogland 2001). Particularly work on overcoming the lack of normality in variable distribution (including
Muthén’s earlier papers from the years 1983, 1984)6 went in two directions: one direction
has allowed to construct robust estimators based on scaled Chi-square statistic and robust
standard errors in using ML estimation (Hu et al. 1992; Satorra and Bentler
1988, 1994, 2001; Curran et al. 1996; Yuan and Bentler 1998), while the second direction
has used the strategy of bootstrap resampling to correct standard errors (for a review of this
methodology, see Yung and Bentler 1986; Bollen and Stine 1992; Nevitt and Hancock
2001). The simulation work that was conducted so far (e.g., Fouladi 1998; Hancock and
Nevitt 1999; Nevitt and Hancock 2001) suggested that in terms of bias a standard ‘naı̈ve’
bootstrap mechanism works at least as well as robust adjustments to standard errors.
However, Nevitt and Hancock (2001) suggested that standard errors may be erratic for a
sample size of 200 or fewer, hence samples of 500–1000 may be necessary to overcome
this problem. The complexity of the SEM model should also be diagnosed, because the
Nevitt and Hancock (2001) simulations were based only on a moderately complex factor
model (i.e., smaller sample sizes may be acceptable for simpler models). Finally, an
alternative bootstrapping approach was introduced into the literature by Bollen and Stine
(1992) for estimation of the Chi-square which seems to adequately control the type I error,
though with some some cost to statistical power (see Nevitt and Hancock 2001).

5
Traces of polychoric and polyserial correlations can even be found in the works of Pearson (1901b) and
Olsson (1979) as well as of Poon and Lee (1987), who worked on multivariate ML estimators both for
polychoric and polyserial correlations.
6

There seems to be a growing consensus that the best contribution of Muthén to the analysis of categorical
variables (especially with few categories) was the WLSMV or WLSM estimator implemented in Mplus
(Muthén et al. 1997; Muthén and Muthén 1998) which adjusts the Chi-square statistic and standard errors by
variance and/or mean. On the other hand, in LISREL and EQS a similar approach uses WLS together with
polychoric correlations and asymptotic covariance matrices.

123

322

P. Tarka

6 Contemporary advancements in structural equation modeling
The transformations that SEM has experienced in recent years have caused further generalizations of this analytical strategy. Thanks to the works of Bartholomew (1987),
Muthén (1994, 2001, 2002) and Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh (2004), SEM has become a
very general latent variable model which, together with the linear mixed model/hierarchical linear model, is the most widely recognized statistical solution in the social sciences
(see the works of Muthén and Satorra 1995; MacCallum and Austin 2000; Stapleton 2006).
Most of these contemporary advancements were made in the area of latent growth curve
and latent class growth models for longitudinal data, the Bayesian method, multi-level
SEM models, meta-SEM-analyses, multi-group SEM models, or algorithms adopted from
artificial intelligence in order to discover the causal structure within the SEM framework.
Below we will discuss some of these contemporary developments.

6.1 The Bayesian method in SEM
The Bayesian method created a different perspective for structural equation modeling, in
particular in the context of the estimation procedures. From the Bayesian point of view, the
estimation process is less demanding in the context of deducing the values of population
parameters and is more about updating, sharpening, and refining beliefs about the empirical
world. Thus with the Bayesian approach we use our ‘background knowledge’ (encompassed in what is called ‘a priori’) to aid in the model’s estimation.
Bayesian analysis brought many benefits to SEM. One of them is the opportunity to
learn from the data and to incorporate new knowledge into future investigations. Scholars
need not necessarily rely on the notion of repeating an event (or experiment) infinitely as in
the conventional (i.e., frequentist) framework; instead, they can combine prior knowledge
with personal judgment in order to aid the estimation of parameters. The key difference
between Bayesian statistics and conventional (e.g., ML estimator) statistics is the nature of
the unknown parameters in the statistical model (Van de Schoot and Depaoli 2014). Also,
the Bayesian method helped to improve the estimation of complex models, including those
with random effect factor loadings, random slopes (when the observed variables are categorical), and three-level latent variable models that have categorical variables (Muthén
2010). On the other hand, Bayesian estimation which is based on Markov chain Monte
Carlo algorithms has proved its usefulness in models with nonlinear latent variables
(Arminger and Muthén 1998) or multi-level latent variable factor models (Goldstein and
Browne 2002), and those which can be generated on the basis of a semiparametric estimator (Yang and Dunson 2010). Moreover, Bayesian estimation has helped to obtain
impossible parameter estimates, thus aiding model identification (Kim et al. 2013), producing more accurate parameter estimates (Depaoli 2013) and aiding situations in which
only small sample sizes are available (Zhang et al. 2007; Kaplan and Depaoli 2013). Also,
with the Bayesian approach to SEM, researchers may favorably present their empirical
research, e.g., in the confidence interval (CI) (Scheines et al. 1999).

6.2 Multi-level SEM modeling
Other progress that was made was the adaptation of multi-level analysis (MLM) in multilevel SEM regression modeling for latent variables (ML-SEM). The multi-level regression
models were primarily used to secure consistent estimates of standard errors and to test

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

323

statistics due to dependent observations within the clusters, which represented typical
examples of data based on a hierarchical structure (e.g., individuals nested within
households which are also nested within neighborhoods or districts). Much later, the
logical next step was a general model for multi-level structural relations accommodating
latent variables as well as the possibility of finding missing data at any level of that
hierarchy.
Multi-level analysis was first proposed by Goldstein and McDonald (1988), McDonald
and Goldstein (1989), Lee (1990) and McDonald (1993, 1994). However, it was Meredith and
Tisak (1984) who had a ‘vision’ of combining SEM with MLM. The other works referred to
problems associated with multi-level and multiple group structural equations analysis
(McArdle and Hamagami 1996), the intersection between SEM and MLM using separate
structures for fixed and random effects to make them maximally consistent (Rovine and
Molenaar 2000, 2001), or the application of SEM in estimating MLM for dyadic data
(Newsom 2002). Attention was also paid to problems connected with estimating both balanced and unbalanced designs for linear structural relations in two-level data.7 Muthén
(1990, 1991, 1994) proposed, for example, a partial maximum likelihood solution as a
simplification of the unbalanced designs, which entailed the computation of a single betweengroups covariance matrix and an ad hoc estimator/scaling parameter. He also presented the
way to estimate the two-level SEM by using available SEM software. Consequently, multilevel SEM models allowed researchers to create separate models for within-cluster and
between-cluster covariance matrices (Matsueda 2012). Muthén’s proposal was grounded on
the specification of separate within- and between-cluster models, and on further application of
the multiple-group option to estimate the parameters simultaneously. Muthén (1994) argued
that by using this method the estimator would behave equivalently to the maximum likelihood
in balanced designs and would be consistent (with reasonable standard errors and test
statistics) in unbalanced designs. Much later, Liang and Bentler (2004) debated on the
similarities and differences between the various formulations of two-level structural equation
models and presented a computationally efficient EM algorithm for obtaining ML estimates
for unbalanced designs which included cases missing at random.
Further development of ML-SEM analysis can be dated to the work of Rabe-Hesketh
et al. (2001, 2004) and Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh (2004), who proposed a more general
approach to multi-level structural equation modeling which, at present, is known under the
name of Generalized Linear And Mixed Modeling (GLLAMM—computer software) and
which is based on three related parts: the response model, the structural equation model for
latent variables, and the distributional assumptions for latent variables. GLLAMM was
prepared for a wide range of multilevel latent variable models that can be used for multivariate responses of mixed type, including continuous data, duration/survival data,
dichotomous data, or ordered/unordered categorical responses and rankings. The opportunities of using GLLAMM range from multi-level generalized linear solutions or
7

The use of multi-level SEM models in the early years was slightly limited since these models were
hampered by the fact that closed-form mathematical expressions have only been available for perfectly
balanced designs. Hence alternative numerical procedures were developed (e.g., iterative estimation procedures such as full maximum likelihood—Goldstein 1986; Longford 1987; restricted maximum likelihood—Mason et al. 1983; or Bayesian estimation—Kaplan and Depaoli 2013) in order to obtain efficient
estimates for unbalanced designs (see e.g., Goldstein and McDonald 1988; Muthén 1997; Yuan and Bentler
2007). Most of these works focused on expanding SEM for application with dependent data structures (a
violation of the assumption of independence), which often led to biased test statistics, standard errors, and
even parameter estimates due to inappropriate aggregation across levels of analysis (Raudenbush and Bryk
2002).

123

324

P. Tarka

generalized linear mixed models, through multi-level factor or latent trait models, item
response models, latent class models, to multi-level structural equation models.

6.3 Meta-analysis in SEM
The necessity of comparison and synthesis of all research findings across the studies has
laid the foundations for meta-analysis in SEM (MA-SEM), which was created on the basis
of three main objectives: testing the consistency of the estimates and effect sizes in
different studies, estimation of a polled effect size, and identification of potential moderators that influence the model’s structure (Viswesvaran and Ones 1995; Hunter and
Schmidt 2004). Researchers can also use MA-SEM in testing causal models (e.g., Becker
and Schram 1994; Miller and Pollock 1994; Shadish 1996).
Since the theoretical principles had already been worked out, both for MA and SEM, a
natural step in further methodological work was to find answers as to how to secure the
effective integrity of these two statistical approaches. It should also be mentioned that MA
and SEM were developed under different research traditions, e.g., the statistical theories of
MA and SEM were based on distributions of correlations and covariance matrices,
respectively. Hence there is no guarantee that inferences based on combining these two
approaches will always be correct. Moreover, empirical studies on the validity of these
procedures are still rare (Cheung 2000, 2002; Hafdahl 2001).
A first assumption that was stated in the literature in the context of combining SEM with
MA was fitting the structural equation model on the meta-analyzed covariance or correlation matrix. Subsequently, two (often complementary) approaches were proposed based
on univariate and multivariate methods. In the former approach, which is similar to conventional meta-analysis, the class of univariate methods refers to the elements of a correlation matrix which are treated as independent within studies and are pooled separately
across studies (e.g., Brown and Peterson 1993). The dependency of correlation coefficients
(calculated as untransformed correlation coefficients r or transformed coefficients z in
meta-analysis, e.g., see the works of Corey et al. 1998; Hunter and Schmidt 1990; Schulze
2004; Cheung and Chan 2005; Furlow and Beretvas 2005) within the studies is not taken
into account (as opposed to multivariate methods), and a population value is estimated for
each correlation coefficient separately. Later, when the correlation coefficients are pooled
across studies (using the r or z method), one pooled correlation matrix can typically be
constructed from separate coefficients, and the hypothesized structural model can then be
fit into this matrix as if it were an observed matrix in a sample. Thus the main problems of
the univariate methods as referred to in the early development of MA-SEM were: the lack
of dependency of the correlation coefficients; non-positive definitive correlation matrices
(Wothke 1993) due to different elements of the matrix which are based on different
samples; lower level of precision in the correlation coefficients; and different results for
different sample sizes which are associated with different correlation coefficients.
In the case of the latter approach, i.e., the multivariate method, two strategies were
proposed, i.e., generalized least squares (Becker 1992) and two-stage structural equation
modeling (Cheung 2002; Cheung and Chan 2005). Becker (1992) used GLS estimation to
pool correlation matrices by taking the dependencies between the correlations into account.
That meant not only that the sampling variances but also the sampling covariances in each
study could be used to weight the correlation coefficients. Later, as the population
parameters become unknown, estimates of the covariances between correlations can be
obtained by plugging in sample correlations. However, because estimates from a single
study are often not stable, Becker and Fahrbach (1994) and Furlow and Beretvas (2005)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

325

recommended that pooled estimates of population correlation be used by using the
weighted mean correlation across samples. In contrast, in the two-stage structural equation
modeling that was proposed by Cheung (2002) and Cheung and Chan (2005), multi-group
SEM could be applied to pool the correlation coefficients at stage one and then in stage
two, and the structural model could be fitted to the pooled correlation matrix by using
weighted least squares, i.e., the WLS estimator, in which the weight matrix in the WLS
procedure represents the inversed matrix with the asymptotic variances and covariances of
the pooled correlation coefficients from stage one. This ensured that correlation coefficients which were estimated with more precision (based on more studies) in stage one
obtained more weight in the estimation of the model parameters in stage two. However, the
precision of a stage-one estimate depended on the number and size of the studies that had
reported the specific correlation coefficient.
To sum up, the MA-SEM has introduced important quality to SEM by providing an
integrative framework analysis in which researchers can pose scientific questions that are
not necessarily addressed in one study. Researchers have gained the opportunity to test
structural models that have not been tested in any primary study (Viswesvaran and Ones
1995). This is a truly attractive feature of the MA-SEM because one can empirically test
the viability of a structural model (or perhaps of competing models) by combining the
available evidence from potentially disparate literatures. Second, as noted in treatments of
SEM (e.g., Barrett 2007; Kline 2011), strong inferences from tests of structural models are
dependent on a sufficiently large sample (i.e., at least 200 cases). Although SEM studies
can certainly achieve reasonable sample sizes, meta-analytic correlations are typically
generated from samples that far exceed these minimum values, which means that the
parameter estimates and fit statistics will be more stable than values generated from any
single sample (i.e., primary study) (Landis 2013). Also, the MA-SEM was initiated for
testing hypothetical models across studies with the same meaning, research context, and
with the purpose of a comparison of these models (MaCallum and Austin 2000).

6.4 Multi-group SEM analysis
Besides the possibility of comparing research findings in the MA-SEM strategy, the necessity
of diagnosing group/sample similarities based on multi-group SEM analysis (MG-SEM) also
appeared in the literature. To recall, in the social sciences researchers often have to deal with
several samples-groups arising from one or several populations. Consequently, it is important
to understand to what extent these might differ (Muthén 1989a, b). In SEM this can partially
be achieved by testing the equivalence of the SEM model parameters, such as factor loadings,
path coefficients, or variances of factors (Yuan and Bentler 2001).
MG-SEM was initiated by Jöreskog (1971), who developed a maximum likelihood
estimator for SEM with multiple groups, and by Sörbom (1974), who studied differences in
the context of factor means across groups. Sörbom’s approach later became a generally
accepted solution thanks to the work of Browne and Arminger (1995), who renamed it the
Mean And Covariance Structure—MACS. Next, Bentler et al. (1987), and later Muthén
(1989a), proposed an alternative approach, i.e., the generalized least squares estimator, and
Satorra and Bentler (2001) developed scaled tests in the multi-group analysis of moment
structures. Finally, Muthén (1989b), Yuan and Bentler (2001) worked out solutions which
helped to eliminate problems with the so-called nonstandard samples (e.g., containing
missing data, nonnormal data, and data with outliers).
The process of MG-SEM analysis entails that some path coefficients in a multi-group
SEM model are constrained equally, while other coefficients remain varying, across

123

326

P. Tarka

groups. By testing the equality or invariance of path coefficients across groups, the
researcher obtains the opportunity to examine whether different groups behave similarly
(Hayduk 1987). Initially, when the population covariance matrices are deemed to be equal
across groups, the next step to substantiate the measurement invariance is to check whether
the sample covariance matrices in all of the groups can be adequately fitted by the same
model. Then the cross-group equalities of factor loadings, error variances, factor variancescovariances and structural paths are taken into account sequentially. We also assume the
mean structures, where cross-group equalities of intercepts and factor means are examined.
Usually, the golden rule of MG-SEM analysis states that if the statistic at the hypothesized
model is not significant at a level of 0.05, the researcher can move to the next level by
using a Chi-square-difference statistic. However, as Yuan and Chan (2016) and Yuan et al.
(2016) argued, this rule is unable to control either type I or type II errors. Therefore, to
overcome this problem they suggested to modify the process of testing the null hypothesis
via equivalence testing, which allows researchers to effectively control the size of the
misspecification before moving on to testing a more restricted model.

6.5 Latent growth curve modeling
Finally, the last milestone in structural equation modeling was latent growth curve modeling (LGCM). In LGCM the analysis is based on repeated measures, in which the latent
variables are conceptualized as aspects of change and the factor loadings are interpreted as
parameters representing the dependence of the repeated measures on these unobservable
aspects of change (see the classic works on the subject written by Meredith and Tisak
1990; McArdle and Epstein 1987; Willett and Sayer 1994; Raudenbush 2001; Bollen and
Curran 2006; Duncan et al. 2006; Preacher et al. 2008). Because time is an indicator of the
modeled trends, in LGCM we model the longitudinal data, in which repeated measurements are observed for some outcome variable, at a number of occasions.
The roots of LGCM analysis can be found in panel data modeling (see the comments by
Tucker 1958; Rao 1958); however, it was Meredith and Tisak (1990) who published the
treatment within an SEM framework that is still relevant today. Rao and Tucker constructed a procedure that included unspecified longitudinal curves or functions, while
Meredith and Tisak showed that individual growth curves, which are often modeled within
a multi-level or mixed model framework (Raudenbush and Bryk 2002), can be modeled
within a standard SEM framework by treating the shape of the growth curves as latent
variables with multiple indicators at multiple time points. Other directions of LGCM
development were continued in the area in which time points, or the spacing between time
points, could vary across individuals (Hui and Berger 1983; Bryk and Raudenbush 1987).
Thus latent growth models could be applied to circumstances in which individuals were not
measured within the same intervals. Consequently, latent growth models can be imbedded
in many theoretical models, thus allowing for a more comprehensive and flexible approach
to research design and data analysis than any other single statistical model for longitudinal
data in standard use in the social sciences. As Duncan et al. (2006, p. 4) commented ,
‘‘some of the strengths of these models include the capacity to test the adequacy of the
hypothesized growth form, to incorporate time-varying covariates, and to develop from the
data a common developmental trajectory, thus ruling out cohort effects’’. Furthermore, it
should be mentioned that SEM can be applied to longitudinal data not only in the form of
latent growth curve models but also in the form of autoregressive models and stochastic
differential equations (e.g., Oud and Voelkle 2014; Voelkle 2008; Voelkle et al. 2012).
This development even allows to treat SEM as a more general analytical strategy.

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

327

Finally, the hybrid of the latent growth and latent class models should be mentioned that
was proposed in 1993 by Nagin and Land, who developed a model based on the group
trajectory. This configuration of both models allows to estimate individual trajectories by
using polynomials and then to classify these trajectories into discrete groups. The latent
classes can be viewed as points of support in approximating a continuous distribution of
the unobserved heterogeneity or as reflections of theoretically important groups. Simultaneously, Muthén (2004) developed growth mixture modeling with which researchers are
able to analyze within-class variation among individual trajectories (a mean curve with
variation around it).

7 General statistical and philosophical controversies regarding the use
of SEM models in the social sciences
In the dynamic development of SEM, statistical and philosophical controversies were also
present in the use of this analytical strategy. The statistical aspects mainly refer to specific
technical-methodological problems, whereas the philosophical aspects refer mainly to the
ontological nature of causality and to the role of SEM in the epistemology of causal
inference on the basis of experimental or nonexperimental data. All in all, the practical
issues of using SEM models in research can be boiled down to difficulties in the application of such types of models because of their high level of complexity (see e.g., Bagozzi
1983a; Breckler 1990; Cliff 1983; Fornell 1983; Tomarken and Weller 2003). Below we
will explain in detail some of the problems and controversies pertaining to the construction
and application of SEM models.

7.1 Problems in understanding the role of the null hypothesis and equivalence
in SEM models
One of the main difficulties in using SEM is the reversed role of the null hypothesis which
complicates the process of statistical inference, particularly in the course of interpretation
of the model results. Yet another factor that influences SEM is the ontological character of
the validity of the tested model. We assume that the tested model is exactly true when
testing the overall fit of an SEM model; however, such a model only approximately
represents substantive processes, which means that the hypothesis explaining the exact
goodness of fit of the model is a priori false. SEM models represent only approximate
estimates of the substantive processes. Consequently, the only realistic hypothesis that
might be assumed is the hypothesis of the near/close fit (Cudeck and Henly 1991;
MacCallum and Tucker 1991). Browne and Cudeck (1993), conducting their studies based
on the work of Linhart and Zucchini (1986), presented even conceptual and mathematical
strategies allowing for the representation and evaluation of various sources of errors in the
relationship between models and empirical processes. Their work allowed for the formal
identification of many critical aspects of testing SEM models, such as test of close fit
(Browne and Cudeck 1993), cross validation (Browne 2000a), and statistical power
analysis (MacCallum et al. 1996).
Moreover, factors which complicate inference from SEM refer to the problem of
equivalence. To recall, equivalent models represent various patterns of relationships
between variables but also have the same number of free parameters (and degrees of
freedom) and the same statistical values of the model fit. Thus equivalent models are

123

328

P. Tarka

hardly ever comparable only on the basis of statistical criteria. MaaCallum et al. (1993)
demonstrated that for each substantive model one can actually create one or more
equivalent models; therefore, models of this kind complicate quality assessment in SEM.
Regardless of the adequacy of the proposed theoretical model and the level attained, other
alternative models may have an equivalent degree of fit to the sample matrix S. Consequently, any failure to reject the proposed model does not automatically mean confirmation
of the veracity of that model (Cliff 1983; James et al. 1982). In other words, the presence of
equivalent models reminds us that although an inadequate fit of the model to the data
implies the failure of the proposed theoretical model, an adequate fit does not necessarily
confirm the validity of the proposed substantive process. A truly valid model of the
substantive process reflects just one of many possible models which have an adequate fit to
the data.

7.2 Difficulties in the specification and modification of SEM models
Another source of controversy is inappropriate specification and modification of the SEM
model. The idea of a ‘specification search’ was discussed by MacCallum (1986) but was
originally described by Leamer (1978) as the process of modifying the model in order to
either simplify or improve its fit to the empirical data. Thus, modification seems to be
necessary for all SEM models because they rarely pass the test of fit when compared with
the set of data in the first stage.
There are two general types of specification errors. The first error can be caused by
omission, while the second is based on inclusion of more parameters in the SEM model
than it requires. In order to eliminate these errors, researchers are allowed to use the
strategy of a ‘forward’ or ‘backward’ specification search. The forward specification
corrects any omissions of parameters. The process usually starts with a more restricted
model and then leads towards a more general model (Bentler and Chou 1993; Chou and
Bentler 1990). Errors are usually detected by LM (Lagrange Multiplier) tests or the EPC
(Expected Parameter Change) index (see e.g., Bollen 1989a). On the other hand, the
backward strategy corrects any possible errors of inclusion. The process begins with a
more general model and continues towards a more restricted model which is verified with
the W (Wald) test.
A problematic issue with the above strategies is that there is no literature consensus as
to which is the best strategy. In particular, this lack of agreement is visible when discussing
the model’s errors, sample errors, or violations of normality in the variables (Green et al.
1999; MacCallum 1990; Hayduk 1990). Another problem is that a model which is theoretically too complex is deprived of the basics in substantive theory. As a result, and as
Wheaton (1988) argued, SEM models always undergo modification to improve their fit to
the data, which also means that every model becomes empirically determined and
simultaneously loses its status of an a priori hypothesis. Bollen (1989b) even claimed that
modification in the initial model leads to a purely exploratory analysis; therefore, the
probability levels of tests related to statistical significance for new (modified) versions of
the models should be regarded as only approximations (Bollen 1989b). Also Byrne (2010,
p. 89) explained that ‘‘once a hypothesized model has been rejected, this spells the end of
the SEM as the analytic approach, in its true sense. Although SEM procedures continue to
be used in any respecification and re-estimation of the model, these analyses are
exploratory in the sense that they focus on the detection of misfitting parameters in the
originally hypothesized models’’. Thus, any changes ever made to the model are actually
data-driven and lead the researcher from the realm of hypothesis testing or confirmatory

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

329

analysis to the domain of exploratory analysis. On the other hand, Arbuckle (2007, p. 234)
added that ‘‘in trying to improve a model the researcher should not be guided exclusively
by modification requirements. A modification should be considered only if it makes theoretical or common sense’’. If it is not, such a strategy is prone, through capitalization on
chance, to produce absurd models with satisfying Chi-square values but which are deprived
of theoretical sense. These issues were discussed extensively by MacCallum (1986) and
MacCallum et al. (1992).

7.3 Errors caused by omission of important variables in SEM models
The practical implications of using SEM models also lead to problems regarding the
omission of important variables in the model. The selection of variables comprises a
critical element of SEM model construction since the errors of omission of important
variables (both exogenous and endogenous) have an influence on every parameter of the
tested SEM model. Just as in the case of omitting particular parameters, the omission of
important variables leads to biased parameter estimation and incorrect standard errors.
The issue of omitting important variables in SEM was described generally from the
perspective of unmeasured variables (James 1980; Sackett et al. 2003; Tomarken and
Weller 2003, 2005), however, Cohen and Cohen (1983) have also researched the issue
from the perspective of obtaining spurious relationships. Finally, James et al. (1982) and
Bollen (1989a) addressed this issue from the perspective of the self-containment violation
or pseudo-isolation of the equation system for causal inference. In the assumptions
underlying pseudo-isolation, researchers may believe that each equation of the examined
model possesses a sufficiently large number of important exogenous variables and that the
residuals in the equations include only random disturbances that are not correlated with
exogenous variables. As we know, biases in model parameters caused by the omission of
important observable variables (exogenous or endogenous) apply to all tested types of
SEM models. Thus the problem of pseudo-isolation is a serious threat to causal inference in
SEM analysis.
Given the above, James (1980) pointed out that the relevant questions posed by
researchers should not refer to the issue of whether there is a problem in omitting variables
but about what the magnitude is due to the consequences this problem has on the estimated
parameters in the hypothesized model. Unfortunately, there are no simple mechanisms
which might help to accurately detect that magnitude. This problem still remains unsolved,
though there are two forms that this issue can be addressed by. The first approach is called
the test of an incorrectly specified model (Arminger and Schoenberg 1989) and was
adopted from Hausman’s test (1978), while the second approach relies on sensitivity
analysis. The problem with Hausman’s test lies in its high sensitivity level that is caused by
a correlation between residuals in the equations and the exogenous variables. Therefore,
although Hausman’s idea (1978) is, on an intuitive level, relatively simple to understand, in
practical terms its implementation will be complicated. Besides, the test has two limitations: first, it is sensitive to violation of normality distribution of the residuals; second,
simulation studies have showed (Long and Trivedi 1993) that Hausman’s test does not
provide the model’s optimal properties for small sample sizes.
The second approach, i.e. sensitivity analysis, was created by Rosenbaum (1986) and
further developed by Mauro (1990) and Frank (2000) in estimating the structural path
coefficients, assuming various levels in the values of correlations (theoretically probable
and empirically acceptable) between the exogenous variable (omitted in the model), and
variables (endogenous and exogenous) which were already included. A direct transposition

123

330

P. Tarka

of the sensitivity analysis from the regression model on SEM might be, however, challenging for a researcher who might be ready to use this method but may not know the
methodological nuances. Actually, a sensitivity analysis assumes knowledge not just about
the omitted variables in the model but also about the relationships of these variables with
other variables in the model. To sum up, the effects of omitting an important variable in the
SEM model (either exogenous or endogenous) depend on the form of the tested SEM
models, the role of the omitted variable in the model, and the pattern of relationships
between the excluded variables and the variables included in the model.

7.4 Problems with multicollinearity in SEM
Another issue that largely complicates the inference process in SEM analysis is multicollinearity. The problem of multicollinearity stems from the inclusion of redundant
variables in model, as these carry a limited level of information. In this sense, multicollinearity represents the inverse of problems pertaining to the omission of important
variables in SEM analysis. However, similarly to omitting important variables in the
model, multicollinearity can challenge the results of SEM analysis. In the context of SEM,
as compared to regression analysis, multicollinearity results from too strong a relationship
between observable data and a particular form of the tested model. Models strongly vulnerable to multicollinearity are those which propose moderating relationships (Little et al.
2007) as well as latent growth curve models (Biesanz et al. 2004).
Despite the potentially serious consequences for statistical inference, the problem of
multicollinearity has been relatively little investigated in the context of SEM. Researchers
have not paid sufficient attention to the possible consequences of multicollinearity on SEM
(Grewal et al. 2004). In fact, this knowledge contrasts with advanced knowledge on
regression models for which methods of detection and correction of multicollinearity based
on the variance inflation factor (VIF) or variance-decomposition proportion (VDP) (see
e.g., the works of Belsley 1991; Cohen and Cohen 1983; Draper and Smith 1981) have
already been developed. Also, the approach to overcoming the problem of multicollinearity
in SEM is far more difficult than in the case of classical regression models, e.g., in SEM the
independent variables can be both exogenous X and endogenous Y, and in regression
analysis the incorrect configuration of the variables simply refers to exogenous, i.e.
independent variables X. Moreover, in SEM the variables, being in strong multicollinearity, can assume a latent character. Another difference refers to the relation
between estimation of the model parameter variance and the independent variables that
remain in a linear relationship. In the regression model, each independent variable is
connected only with one estimation of the model parameter variance, whereas in the SEM
model one independent variable can be connected with estimations of a few model
parameter variances. This problem becomes even more complex when strong multicollinearity concerns two or more parameters which correlate latent variables.
The issue of multicollinearity in SEM models, particularly concerning the consequences
of multicollinearity for statistical inference, can also be described in the context of empirical
underidentification (Grewal et al. 2004).8 Kenny (1979) pointed to multicollinearity between
observable exogenous variables of the S matrix as one of the main causes of empirical
underidentification of the model. Also, Rindskopf (1984), Bollen (1989a), Kenny et al. (1998)
8

Kenny (1979) developed the notion of empirical underidentification in situations in which researchers,
despite assuring the identification of the model, cannot achieve a clear-cut solution for the model parameters
in the analyzed S matrix of covariance.

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

331

developed the notion of empirical underidentification of the SEM model as an effect of
multicollinearity between latent variables. On the other hand, Hayduk (1987) created a visual
analysis of the covariance matrix of estimates pertaining to model parameters as a way to
diagnose multicollinearity. Finally, Kaplan (1994) developed the approach of Hayduk (1987)
by using dependency analysis of the correlation matrix based on SEM model parameter
estimates. With this purpose in mind, he used the so-called conditioning number, conditioning index and decomposition of variances (originally applied to incorrect conditioning of
the XTX matrix in regression models) as measures of incorrect conditioning of the correlation
matrix of parameter estimates in the tested SEM model. These solutions were considered
from the perspective of two primary levels. At the first level, the problem of multicollinearity
was described in the context of an independency of the tested model and referred only to the
domain of conditioning covariance matrix S for observable variables. At the second level, the
multicollinearity problem was characterized as a dependent form from the tested model. Both
forms of multicollinearity may be engaged in the fallacious process of inference associated
with SEM, hence both require separate approaches to diagnose and correct the multicollinearity. Also, standard estimators such as ML, GLS, and ADF often require a positivedefinitive S matrix. Consequently, extremely incorrect data conditioning, which creates the
effect of singularity of the S matrix, disqualifies the results of the SEM analysis. Given this,
Wothke (1993) proposed a method of diagnosing the poor conditioning of the S matrix on the
basis of eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Another solution that was proposed in the case of
singularity of the S matrix concerned the application of a ridge estimator (Jöreskog and
Sorböm 1996) and a maximum entropy estimator.
Because there are no simple ways of correcting the problem of multicollinearity, the
analytical strategies may refer to finding compromises between three elements, i.e., data,
methods of parameter estimation, or the form of the tested model. When making a correction of the poor conditioning of the S matrix, one can extend the existing dataset with
new units in the sample. However, this approach does not guarantee improvement and
correct conditioning of the S matrix. On the other hand, incorrect conditioning can be
regulated by deleting redundant observable variables. Unfortunately, this approach requires
a re-specification of the SEM model. Simultaneously, poor conditioning of the S matrix
can be overcome by implementing the ridge or ULS (unweighted least squares) estimators.
Finally, the correction strategy can be boiled down to a reformulation of the tested model.
In extreme cases, such a modification may lead to a change (reduction) in the number of
latent variables, e.g., by investigating the discriminant validity between the latent variables, and in less extreme cases one can enter equality restrictions on the estimated
parameters of the tested model which remain in a strong linear dependency.

7.5 Relationships between model fit and strength of correlation
of the observable variables
The last statistical problem to be discussed here which complicates inference on the basis
of the SEM model is the negative relationship between measures expressing the general
(absolute) fit of the model and the strength of the correlation of the observable variables in
S (Fornell 1983; Fornell and Larcker 1981; Marsh et al. 2004a, b). To recall, a weak
correlation between the observable variables increases the probability of achieving a good
fit of the model. Fornell and Larcker (1981) pointed out, over a quarter of a century ago,
that if the correlations of the observable variables are sufficiently weak, almost every
(correct or incorrect) model will have an adequate level of the matrix fit measured with the
use of the Chi-square statistic and of the derivative descriptive measures of a general fit.

123

332

P. Tarka

Simultaneously, Browne et al. (2002) pointed to such a dependency in the context of
reliable measurements. The effect of this dependency can be a rejection of the correct
model, e.g., when the level of model reliability is high, or acceptance of the incorrect
model in conditions of low reliability of the measurement. Later, Tomarken and Weller
(2003) stressed two discrepancies that appear between measures expressing the absolute fit
and the statistics of the examined SEM model parameters. The first discrepancy is caused
by a negative relationship between the level of measurement reliability and the fit of the
model, while the second is caused by the positive relationship between measurement
precision and estimation precision (which is expressed in lower standard errors) of the
SEM model. In SEM, the former relationship is highly undesirable, while the latter option
is highly expected.
To sum up, information about the relationship between measures of the general model
fit and observable variables in the S matrix as well as the reliability indices carries
tremendous implications for the practice of SEM model analysis. Being aware of these
relationships requires us to make appropriate conclusions, e.g., whether the good fit of the
model is not by any chance the result of low correlations between the observable variables
considered in the model. Such conclusions can be conducted almost on the basis of the
correlation R matrix before proceeding to a final interpretation of the model. Consequently,
in SEM models with latent variables, low reliability will signal that, formally, a good fit of
the tested model to the S matrix was probably obtained due to low correlations between the
observable variables. The reverse situation is also possible, e.g., if the hypothesized model
does not appropriately fit the S matrix but simultaneously obtains a higher level of reliability, one can conclude that the source of this mismatch is not the inadequacy of the model
but a very good selection of the measurement instrument (Browne et al. 2002).

7.6 Theoretical–philosophical controversies in the domain of SEM model
usefulness
Apart from the technical issues as mentioned above, difficulties in using SEM models in
the social sciences also appear in the domain of philosophical arguments. The main
ontological critique of SEM is the latent reality in the social sciences which is so complex
that even a simplified statistical model of this reality can be of no cognitive significance.
On the other hand, the main epistemological argument states that the use of SEM with
nonexperimental data only misleads researchers by creating the illusion of causal process
modeling. We will discuss these problems in depth.
The ontological argument claims that it is impossible to transform the investigated
phenomenon into a limited mathematical form (i.e., into a system of structural equations)
which would justify certain regularities in social life. Moreover, even if such regularities
exist, or processes of data generation are found, they are often doomed to be outdated soon
after their identification because the availability of new sources of data outdates the theory.
The advocates of ontological arguments (e.g., Cartwright 1999, 2001; Fox 1997; Rogosa
1987, 1988, 1995) pointed out that social reality in the world is so complicated and
simultaneously ‘open’ to many changes that its representation in the form of mathematical
rules is impossible, and that the statistical models constructed for such substantive processes can only be a simplification of this world. Cartwright believed that an essential
element of SEM model construction is horizontal reductionism which limits, to a greater
extent, the scope of possible applications of the model or its ‘validity’. Also, Fox (1997)
pointed out that substantive theories in the social sciences are often vague, imprecise, and
highly relative. As a result, any statistical binding of such theories with empirical reality is

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

333

extremely difficult. Rogosa (1987, 1988, 1995) even stated that the causal SEM models
have no scientific value because they represent models of relations between variables and
do not represent causal processes at the level of the individual. Substantive processes take
place in individuals and not between variables. Thus a model which ignores the individual
process of data generation is of little substantive use.
However, when we consider the ontological assumptions, the argument of the openness
of social life and the SEM model’s limitations are not new. In any case, this argument was
the main source of disagreement regarding path analysis between Wright (1920) and Niles
(1922, 1923). Wright (1920, p. 330) was fully aware that the path coefficients in a system
of causes and effects can be calculated if a sufficient number of simultaneous equations can
be made expressing the known correlations in terms of the unknown path coefficients and
expressing the complete determination of the causes to effects. Niles (1922) believed,
however, that the lack of profound knowledge regarding the mechanisms of the causal
process eliminates the usefulness of path analysis. Wright (1920) accepted the human
inability to acquire thorough knowledge regarding the causal process but, at the same time,
he claimed that selective knowledge about the causal process allows one to isolate a part of
this system and to calculate the relative correlation of the variables in this isolated part of a
wider system.
Also, the presentation of other consequences related to SEM, including the specification
of errors and consequences of omitting important variables, raises controversial issues
which have an influence on the appropriate statistical inference conducted on the basis of
SEM. However, we must not forget that all of these doubts can take on the form of extreme
expansionism in either denying or questioning any attempt of description of the substantive
processes analyzed from the perspective of statistical models such as SEM. We cannot
forget that the exclusive knowledge of the correctness of the constructed model, or the
inclusion of all necessary variables for the sake of the analyzed phenomenon, is possessed
by a higher being only. Thus Glymour (1999), just as Wright (1920), and the vast majority
of scholars (MaCallum 2003) were fully aware that SEM models are a priori at least to
some extent imperfect but, on the other hand, they believed that valuable knowledge can be
available through SEM, which, however, does not exempt one from striving to have full
awareness of the limitations of such an analytical strategy.
Finally, the epistemological argument refers to the significance and role of SEM models
in causal analysis. As Meehl and Waller (2002) noticed, some researchers (such as Blalock
1991; Heckman 2005; Irzik and Meyer 1987; Pearl 1998a, b, 2000) adopted the SEM
strategy as the best way of causal inference with nonexperimental data, while others (e.g.,
Freedman 1987, 2006; Sobel 1995) thought that using SEM would be misleading because
it gives a promise or an illusion of causal process modeling with nonexperimental data.
The current consensus has been reached more in the direction of a careful application of
SEM as an established method of investigating causal relationships from the perspective of
nonexperimental data (see, for example, papers by McDonald 2004; Meehl and Waller
2002). These controversies surrounding the SEM role in causal inference should not be
surprising because, as Cook and Campbell (1979) explained a long time ago, the epistemology of causal inference remains in a productive state of chaos. This view was also
confirmed in a discussion between Cartwright (1989) and Glymour (1999) as well as
between Humphreys and Freedman (1996), as it concerned the conditions enabling causal
inference from passive observations.
Perhaps the most fervent critic of SEM models and their applications in causal analysis
was Freedman (1987, 1991), who argued that SEM only distracts the researchers’ attention
from real issues such as a strong substantive theory, an adequate research plan and an

123

334

P. Tarka

adequate process of data collection. The SEM, according to Freedman’s point of view,
promises something that is actually unavailable in the process of applying a statistical
model, as long as there exists limited knowledge on the subject of modeling substantive
processes. Cartwright (1999) raised the same issue by claiming that causal processes are
developed as the effect of multiple smaller causal mechanisms that cooperate and interact
with one another. Knowledge concerning such types of mechanisms does not come from
statistical data, and when this knowledge is already gathered, statistics soon become
unimportant since the causal processes have been identified. Freedman (1987, 1991) also
claimed that despite the statistical theory allowing to investigate the problems of measurement errors, new solutions based on nonlinearity,9 or the omission of important
variables in SEM models, it does not enable one to test these problems and to completely
eliminate them from SEM. Freedman (1991) indicated that the practice of making up for
the restrictions of the substantive theory or the research plan and involving many competing models is also counterproductive. In response to these critics, Wright (1921, 1934)
argued that path analysis was not expanded in order to discover the cause or causal
relationships. Wright (1934) also pointed out that it is necessary to possess some knowledge about the substantive theory rather than to entirely rely on path analysis as a statistical
method of generating this theory. Similarly, Duncan (1975) stated that no statistical
method can be used as a final test of causal order and quoted the following words stated by
Fisher (1970; p. 192): ‘‘if we choose a group of social phenomena with no antecedent
knowledge of the causation or absence of causation among them, then the calculation of
correlation coefficients, total or partial, will not advance us a step towards evaluating the
importance of causes’’. Finally, Pearl (1998a), when responding to Breckler (1990), again
stressed that the knowledge or theory concerning causal relations is necessary because the
observable relationships in a set of data cannot be the sole basis for causal inference.
Later, Freedman (1987) admitted that his arguments were based mainly on common
sense, however, the world of science reacted to his critiques, claiming that most of the
empirical applications in patch analysis have nothing to do with causal analysis, so the
causality language must be replaced with a better language based on prediction (Muthén
1987b). There were even scholars (Bentler 1987) who claimed that Freedman’s critiques
were simply the result of ignoring contemporary achievements that had been generated
within this analytical strategy. However, despite all of these reactions, Freedman’s critiques (1987; 1991) became an important impulse for considering causal analysis and the
role of statistical models in causal analysis in nonexperimental research (i.e., Heckman
2005; Cox and Wermuth 2004; Dawid 2000; Abbott 1998; Marini and Singer 1998; Sobel
1995, 1996, 2000; Pearl 2000, 2002; Holland 1986, 1988). As a consequence, causal
analysis now covers two objectives. From one point of view it realizes the objective
pertaining to some kind of activity (action) and thus supports social practice and diagnosis.
From the other point of view, a causal analysis realizes cognitive objectives pertaining to
scientific explanation. Holland (1986), Dawid (2000), Heckman (2005) and Cox and
9

Comments on nonlinear relationships and nonlinear interaction between variables or issues concerning
methods allowing to specify and to test interaction models and nonlinear effects in reference to SEM models
can be found in papers by Schumaker and Marcoulides (1998), Yang-Wallentin et al. (2004), Moulder and
Algina (2002), Lee et al. (2004), Cortina et al. (2001) and Marsh et al. (2004a, b). Particular attention should
be paid to the work of McDonald (1967, 1983), Mooijaart and Bentler (1986), who developed the statistical
basics of models consisting of nonlinear relationships between variables and nonlinear interactions. In some
part these works were connected with the work of Kenny and Judd (1984). Since then there have been many
developments allowing to test mediation and moderation (interaction) in SEM which even led to a new
software package based on R for nonlinear SEM.

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

335

Wermuth (2004) indicated that these two areas of causal thinking require some kind of
alternative approach or statistical treatment, e.g., obtaining action-oriented objectives
requires thinking about the effects of causes or the magnitude of the causal effect, whereas
obtaining the cognitive objective requires thinking about the causes of effects when we
want to understand causal relationships between theoretical constructs. The analysis of the
effects of causes is typically related to an analysis of counterfactuals (Holland 1986, 1988;
Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), whereas the analysis of the causes of effects refers to an
analysis of the structural model (Cox and Wermuth 2004; Heckman 2005). However, up to
now there has been no consensus as to which of these two objectives is possible to achieve
through the postulate and test of the statistical model in the case of nonexperimental data.
This discussion was continued by Holland (1988), who developed the approach of counterfactual states to the analysis of a simple recursive structural model, whereas Steyer
(2005) presented concepts of individual and moderate causal effects which were central to
the counterfactual approach within the SEM framework. Holland (1988) also promoted the
issue that the variable gender or other factual variables which are not changeable cannot be
introduced as causes to a model. This scholar argued that causes can only be variables
which can be changed or manipulated. This was a valuable contribution to the development
of SEM. Later, Pearl (1998a, 2000), starting from graph theory (Wright 1934), developed
the theory of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), which connected the counterfactual
approach with the SEM model in a more common theoretical framework. These and other
solutions in SEM made it possible to understand the meaning (the interpretation) of
equations and structural coefficients of the model and allowed to determine the conditions
within which the equations and coefficients may assume a causal interpretation. However,
we also need to be cautious of the results of SEM analysis which can often be empirically
overweighted. Consequently, if the hypothesized model is only empirically determined, at
minimal theory input, then such a model is simply a convenient summary of a covariance
matrix. The interpretation of this model’s equations expresses only the statistical relationships between variables in reference to the analyzed set of data. If, however, the tested
SEM model is theoretically determined by a strong theory, then it receives the status of
representing stable causal relationships in the empirical process of data processing. But
even when taking these arguments into account we must still admit that in the literature
there is no explicit consensus regarding the matter of determining the exact conditions
allowing for causal analysis in SEM. This controversy became the main reason for many
divisions between researchers who decided to implement the inductive approach in SEM
(e.g., Scheines et al. 1994), those who claimed that causal analysis in SEM can be conducted only on theoretical foundations if they are supported by additional conditions (e.g.,
Cox and Wermuth 2004; Heckman 2005; Kenny 1979; Pearl 1998a), and those who simply
rejected any possibility of analyzing causal processes in the form of the SEM model,
particularly in reference to nonexperimental data (e.g., Freedman 1997; Holland 1995).
For example, inductive algorithms dedicated to discovering causal relationships were
developed by Glymour et al. (1987) and further improved by Scheines et al. (1994), (1997),
as well as Spirtes et al. (1993, 1995). Glymour et al. (1987), instead of focusing on the
estimation and testing of structural models specified a priori, worked on computer algorithms (TETRAD) derived from artificial intelligence in order to ‘discover’ the causal
structure. Thus they returned to the earlier ideas of Spearman, Frisch, Simon, Blalock, and
Costner, who tried, in various ways, to induce a causal structure from patterns of association among variables (see Matsueda 2012). The basis of the TETRAD project was the
belief that the observed correlations between variables might represent manifestations of a
deeper sense, namely of the causal processes underlying the statistical relationships. The

123

336

P. Tarka

objective of TETRAD was thus not a criticism of the axiom explaining that the correlation
of variables does not imply a causal relationship between these variables, as researchers
involved in TETRAD questioned only the assumption that if causality between two
variables would fail, then the possibility of finding any causality in the system of variables
(e.g., with more than two variables) would also fail. However, despite the fact that the joint
distribution of two variables does not provide causal information, a similar distribution
including a system of many variables does indeed carry such information. This information
can be detected on the basis of TETRAD inductive algorithms, where ‘causal independence’ (the causal Markov condition or the Reichenbach principle) and ‘faithfulness’
comprise the main assumptions underlying TETRAD, i.e. they bridge the statistical
information and causality (Woodward 1998). A paradox, however, lies in the fact that the
TETRAD project was also criticized (Cartwright 1989; Freedman 1997; Humphreys and
Freedman 1996) for a severe inductive approach to analysis or, rather, the discovery of
causal processes. Again, Cartwright (1989) argued that there is no possibility of discovering causal relationships on purely statistical grounds.
TETRAD was not, however, the main topic of discussion that was conducted at that
time. Members of the SEM community were searching not only for alternative approaches
to solve problems with causality in SEM but also slowly retreated from making rigorous
causal claims and using causal language by proposing a strategy based on counterfactual
thinking, e.g., ‘‘what would happen if a subject would receive a different treatment or value
of the independent variable’’ (Cartwright 1995; Bollen 1989a; James et al. 1982). Consequently, the issues being discussed went further in the direction of the experimental and
nonexperimental domain of data analysis. Particularly the experimental plans in SEM
causal analysis provided important premises for detecting plausible causal relationships.
Thus ‘manipulation’ and ‘randomization’ obtained a privilege in causal inference from
data collected on the basis of experimental research.
In manipulation, the causal relationship represents a nonsymmetrical direction in which
the assumption of time preference has to appear (Collingwood 1940). This assumption
originates from the early works of Hume (1739), who claimed that the cause precedes the
effect in time, although during SEM development this assumption has slightly been
loosened. A good example might be a nonrecursive relationship in which casual asymmetry is not explained by time asymmetry. In most cases, however, researchers assume that
(Bollen 1989a; Kenny 1979) a causal interpretation of the model will be stronger provided
that the time preference will be demonstrated. In manipulation, the effect of the cause can
be measured on account of the initiated changes, so in every case one needs to carefully
design the research plans (e.g., in experimental or quasi-experimental research). In contrast, in nonexperimental research only a ‘‘passive observation between the state X and
state Y, hence the causal relationship can be only observed on the basis substantive theory,
nothing else’’ appears.
In the latter case, i.e., in randomization, Sobel (1995) and Heckman (2005, 2008) pointed
out the differences between the so-called fixing and conditioning of exogenous variables as a
key to distinguish real and seemingly causal effects. To recall, defining the exogenous
variable is characteristic of an experimental situation in which the study’s participants are
randomly selected and ascribed to levels of one or more exogenous variable(s). This fixing
provides the credibility of the assumption that the selection which was conducted to a particular level of the X exogenous variable will be independent of the Y endogenous variable.
Also, a fixing generates an effect where the exogenous variables are neither correlated with
other exogenous variables nor with any prospective and unobservable causes (both the
endogenous and exogenous variables). Since in nonexperimental research the process of

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

337

selecting the random variable is rarely randomized, researchers have focused on the conditioning mechanisms. In research in which the process of selection is not random (quasiexperiments and nonexperiments), the identification of important correlates of this selection
constitutes a cornerstone for conducting valid causal inference. It has been stated that a good
causal SEM model should include at least two kinds of exogenous variables: X of which the
causal effects remain in the area of substantive theory and variables Z which represent
correlates of the selection process. Cox and Wermuth (2004) suggested that the adequate
development of a causal process by the hypothesized SEM model sometimes requires that the
researcher retreat causes X as endogenous variables which can be explained along with effects
Y by the set of correlates Z.10
Pearl (2000, 2002) presented analogous consequences of randomization and conditioning in the context of nonlinear causal models. His proposition of a nonparametric
structural causal model could also hold regardless of the distributional and other statistical
assumptions about a particular dataset. Hence, Pearl’s idea permitted the estimation of
total, direct, and indirect effects without making any commitment to the form of the
equations or to the distributions of the error terms, and it enabled an extension of the
mediation analysis to systems involving categorical variables in the presence of nonlinear
interactions.
Finally, Pearl (2000, 2002), on issues regarding causality, defined the causal assumptions on the basis of a graphical model, which has allowed many generations of researchers
to logically infer the causality from a set of theorems applied to the graph. Pearl advanced
SEM (see Matsueda 2012) in five general steps by: (1) the application of new mathematical
notation to reflect causality, such as replacing the algebraic ‘equals’ sign with a sign that
reflects a causal path; (2) deriving a theorem, i.e., the ‘‘back-door’’ criterion, to determine
which covariates should be controlled to arrive at a causal relationship in the SEM; (3)
deriving a theorem, termed ‘‘d-separation’’ (directed separation), which gives the necessary
and sufficient conditions for independence between two sets of variables conditioned on a
third set within an acyclic directed graph; (4) providing some simple mathematical notation
to make counterfactual statements which can be analyzed within the directed graph; and (5)
providing an algorithm for identifying equivalent models.

8 Opportunities and threats in the application of SEM models
in the social sciences: conclusions
Given the above arguments and facts, we should now conclude that the increase in the
number of publications regarding structural equation modeling means that SEM is currently one of the most discernible analytical strategies in the literature that is being
developed across many fields of the social sciences. The directions of all advances
probably vary according to the substantive problems which individuals face in various
disciplines. Thus SEM models can be extensively applied in the analyses of many processes and phenomena occurring, for example, in sociology, pedagogy, social policy, and
the family sciences. They can also, which is extremely important, be applied in explaining
economic phenomena, particularly in economy (see papers by Haavelmo 1943; Epstein
1987; Aldrich 1989; Golob 2003; Rao and Holt 2005) or in marketing research (e.g.,
10
For those interested in gaining more knowledge on the consequences of randomization and passive
observation of causal inferences, please refer to the works of Pratt and Schalifer (1984, 1988), Sobel (1995)
or Pearl (2000).

123

338

P. Tarka

Fornell 1983; Anderson and Gerbing 1988; Bagozzi 1980; 1983b, Bagozzi and Yi 1988;
Hulland et al. 1996; Baumgartner and Homburg 1996; Chin et al. 2008). The generalizations of the SEM model mentioned in this article have also provided a basis for its broad
use in psychology (e.g., Bentler and Speckart 1981; Kohn and Schooler 1982; Bynner and
Romney 1986; Chassin et al. 1993; MaCallum and Austin 2000; Karimi and Meyer 2014),
demographic research (e.g., Beckman et al. 1983; Thompson 1983; Linver et al. 2002),
biology (Shipley 2000; Pugesek et al. 2003), genetics (e.g., Li 1956; Evans et al. 2002; Liu
et al. 2008), or even in the medical sciences (e.g., Wheaton 1978, 1985; Chen and Land
1986; Bentler and Stein 1992; Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh 2004; Raina et al. 2005;
Stephenson et al. 2006) and in criminology (Matsueda 1982; Matsueda and Heimer 1987;
Gibbs et al. 2003; Gau 2010). In short, the SEM approach, through its generality, can
prospectively be applied in many different sciences; however, this does not yet mean that
structural equation modeling is indeed applied by scholars in particular areas of the abovementioned sciences. In fact, a recently published work by Saris and Revilla (2016) showed
that in major journals in sociology, political science, and marketing, hardly any of the
considered analytical models (which included latent variables) paid attention to issues of
correction of the measurement errors, though these are the main reasons in the application
of the SEM approach.
Admittedly, the advantage of SEM models over other approaches and statistical models
is, above all, the fact that SEM allows to conduct a complex, multidimensional, and more
precise analysis of empirical data taking into account different aspects of the examined
reality and abstract concepts or theoretical constructs. To provide a simple example here,
we can consider a theoretical construct measuring human intelligence which is not analyzed directly as it is in case of height or weight, but only through instruments designed to
measure latent variables. Another good example can be studies related to marketing, in
which SEM models provide explanations for constructs such as satisfaction and customer
loyalty, or studies referring to relationships between shoppers’ personal values and their
hedonic purchase behaviors (Steenkamp and Baumgartner 2000). Also, in management,
SEM models (Shook et al. 2004; Marcoulides 2013) have proved their usefulness in
examining, for example, relationships between market orientation strategies employed by
companies or by the learning organization and attitudes expressed by the staff towards
market research effectiveness (Tarka 2017). Thus analyses which are based on SEM offer
more than the classical methods known in statistics. More importantly, the generality of
SEM can be evidenced in the ability to parameterize the SEM to estimate a well-known
class of alternative approaches known as general linear modeling (GLM) which includes,
among others, the t test, ANOVA, ANCOVA, MANOVA, MANCOVA, or multiple
regression. The SEM can be expanded to estimate measurement errors through the use of
multiple indicator latent factors, the testing of complex mediational mechanisms through
the decomposition of effects, and the testing of moderational mechanisms through estimation of multiple group analysis, just to name a few. Thus any linear model (e.g.,
regression) seems to be slightly worse as compared to SEM, not only due to the omission
of correction in the measurement errors but also because of the fact that it is possible to
ignore the indirect effects. Unquestionably, SEM is a significant and indispensable tool for
empirical researchers. As Fornell (1983) argued, SEM reflects the second generation of
statistical techniques that can be used to test the extent to which the respective research
meets the recognized standards for high quality statistical analysis (Cook and Campbell
1979). In the first generation of techniques, Fornell (1983) included, among others, analytical methods such as multidimensional scaling, exploratory factor analysis, canonical
analysis, variance analysis, or regression analysis, claiming that the advantage of SEM

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

339

mainly consists in the possibility of identifying exact measurement errors during analysis,
using abstract, non-observable constructs in the examined reality, analyzing their correlations, and confronting the given theory with the obtained empirical data. Thus SEM allows
researchers to answer a set of interrelated questions in a single, systematic, and comprehensive analysis by modeling the relationships among multiple independent and dependent
theoretical constructs simultaneously (Gerbing and Anderson 1988). This capability for
simultaneous analysis greatly differs from most first generation statistical models (e.g., linear
regression, LOGIT, ANOVA, MANOVA) which analyze only one layer of the linkages
between independent and dependent variables at a time. Also classical statistical models, such
as variance analysis, canonical analysis, or even discriminant analysis, make it only possible
to conduct measurement on the basis of a single linkage between sets of dependent and
independent variables, whereas structural modeling (SEM) makes it possible to simultaneously analyze data sets with many series of different linkages. Consequently, SEM allows for
complicated variable relationships to be expressed through hierarchical or non-hierarchical
and recursive or non-recursive structural equations, and to present a more complete picture of
the entire model (Hanushek and Jackson 1977). Moreover, as Bagozzi (1980) claimed, SEM
makes researchers define their research problems more precisely with reference to the
examined phenomenon, makes them formulate clear targets and research hypotheses before
starting the analyses, makes them provide precise definitions of the considered theoretical
constructs and their further operationalization, and forces them to find the right, logic relationships between the constructs. Also, intricate causal networks enable SEM to characterize
real-world processes better than simple correlation-based models. Therefore, SEM is more
suited for the mathematical modeling of complex processes to serve both the theory and
practice. SEM also provides a much better formal way not only to verify a given theory but
also to conduct this verification on the basis of the analyzed measures, and because they join
and at the same time confront the two spaces, i.e., theory and empirical data, they offer
researchers a huge potential in the scientific explanation of phenomena alongside simple
descriptive statistics or simple empirical relationships. As a consequence, researchers who
choose the SEM model handle the analytical task with more precision than in the case of the
procedure belonging to ‘‘traditional’’ statistics. The application of SEM analysis in the social
sciences permits their development, because SEM, more effectively than ever, confronts the
‘‘theory’’ with ‘‘experience’’, which results not only in optimizations of theoretical models
but also leads to the optimization of tools used for the diagnosis of reality.
To sum up, researchers representing different fields of the social sciences can, or rather
should, rely on SEM analysis and models in their research. The use of SEM will allow
them to analyze complex research problems based on an analysis of cause-effect phenomena. It is the very complex structure of social phenomena that creates a growing
demand for the use of SEM models, which are supposed to ‘‘copy’’ the social phenomena
precisely. In other words, the researcher, when beginning to construct theoretical models
which aspire to explain complex scientific problems of a social character, is, thanks to
empirical verification, capable of gaining a better understanding of the importance of the
examined phenomena. However, before the construction process of SEM models starts, the
researcher should remember to maintain all theoretical assumptions in the SEM analysis.
As it is known, in SEM the researcher should try, above all, to test the structure of
covariance of the observable variables with the use of a simplified model structure and on
the basis of the theory’s formalized elements. Thus SEM models are the synthesis of
theoretical knowledge and current empirical results regarding the examined phenomena.
The aim of the model construction is as simple an ‘explanation’ of the examined phenomena as possible, whereas the model itself should be coherent with the empirical

123

340

P. Tarka

observations. To recall, in science the explanation of an event is the logical deduction of
that specific event from the true laws and background conditions surrounding the occurrence of that event (see Hempel 1965).11 Simultaneously, the process of model verification
is, above all, a hypothetical-deductive process because the suggested model is constructed
a priori and then confronted with the empirical set of observations. Scientists assess the
validity of the hypothesis by empirically testing the other deductive consequences of that
hypothesis.
Mulaik and James (1995, p. 118) once even stated that the ‘‘structural equation model as
a representation of an objective state of affairs that stands in causal and/or criterial relationships with the data, and thereby as a causal explanation of the data, does not only
reproduce the data. Something more is required with SEM: evidence supporting the
assertion that the state of affairs represented by the model exists as represented, independently of the observer’’. Structural equation models as mathematical models represent
an objective state of affairs. In SEM analysis we do not make such assumptions that apply
to statistical exploratory models, which means that we do not use the SEM model to find
out something about the empirical data but, conversely, we use the given set of observations to verify the theory through the agency of the SEM model, or, actually, we try to
explain to what extent the model reflects previous research or the theoretical assumptions
which are the basis for the model’s construction (Kelloway 1998). That is why in SEM
strategy researchers should not accept models at any price even when the tests used on
them suggest that they should indeed do so. This would lead nowhere. SEM models are a
kind of test and ‘indirect assistance’ which, on the basis of obtained empirical data and its
verification, interferes with the whole process of explaining complex phenomena in light of
a given theory. If the theory accepts rational justifications, the logic premises of a given
phenomenon, and is, in other words, true, then it is the verification (with the use of SEM
models) that should give evidence in the form of empirical results and, more specifically,
we should express this evidence via the direction and values of the coefficients describing
the relationships between the theoretical constructs which are considered in SEM analysis.
On the contrary, if the model does not confirm the theory then we can draw two conclusions, i.e., proving that either the theory is wrong or that the material (empirical data) on
the basis of which the SEM model was constructed is of poor quality.
At the same time, the fact that a given theory was confirmed by the SEM model does not
yet mean that the theoretical assumptions should be considered as unquestionable, i.e.,
these assumptions only become more reliable and valid in light of the obtained results.
They receive confirmation in the context of the conducted statistical analyses, on the basis
of the adopted criteria in these analyses and of the levels of the theoretical assessment of
the phenomena (Bollen and Long 1993). Therefore, a positive verification of the hypothetical relationships existing in the SEM model does not yet mean the end of the analyses,
as we allow for the probability of building another theoretical model which can be far
better than the previous one. What is more, for a given set of variables the researcher is
usually able to determine many models representing completely different theoretical
consequences but having an equivalent fit to the empirical data. Therefore, the theory of
the examined process is whether a psychological, sociological, economic, or marketing
background is a key criterion in choosing the model. Without a strong theoretical background or initial research conducted in the given field there is no way of being able to
11
Unfortunately, in Hempel’s deductive-nomological formulation of the explanation the concept of
causality as a form of explanation was dropped out of consideration for and replaced by the logical operation
of material implication.

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

341

distinguish between many available ways to determine relationships between variables. In
other words, it should be clear that a researcher cannot use SEM to derive a description of
data such as ‘‘let the data speak for themselves’’, because they do not, e.g., if the
covariance matrix contains only 7 variables, one can sort these variables into 5040 different causal orders and therefore one can also obtain 5040 perfectly fitting saturated
structural models, but one can also find many more alternative fitting models. That is why
SEM can only be used given pre-specified assumptions about the order of the variables and
the specific possible causal effects. What one virtually does with the SEM as an analytical
strategy is to test if these assumptions are in agreement with the obtained empirical data.
This is the only aspect that a researcher can do with SEM, therefore testing is crucial,
which has already been proved in many works (see e.g., Mulaik et al. 1989; Bentler and
Bonett 1980; Bentler 1990; Hu and Bentler 1999; Kenny and McCoach 2003; Hooper et al.
2008). In fact, researchers almost have an obsession over the global goodness of fit, i.e., the
Chi-square test, because in large samples SEM models with many overidentifying
restrictions tend to be rejected even when each restriction only departs trivially from the
null hypothesis. This has caused a significant increase of other, alternative fit indices
designed to offset the effect of sample size on test statistics. One of these was Steiger and
Lind’s (1980) RMSEA, i.e., the root mean squared error of the approximation index, and
Raftery’s (1993, 1995) application of Schwartz’s (1978) Bayesian Information Criterion
index (BIC). For the former index, MacCallum et al. (1996) defined a noncentrality
parameter which helped to calculate the power for the null hypothesis of a perfect as well
as approximate fit. On the other hand, we must not forget that the major problem at that
time was the power of the tests. Also, the sensitivity of fit indices to specification errors
was not known. These issues were discussed by Satorra and Saris (1985) in the Psychometrika journal and by Bollen (1993). Satorra and Saris (1985) independently showed
how to calculate the power of the likelihood ratio test in covariance structure models by
using the noncentral Chi-square distribution and presented a nearly identical way of
approximating the noncentrality parameter. They proved that the likelihood ratio test
statistic is asymptotically equivalent to a quadratic form (Matsueda and Bielby 1986).
Finally, in 1987 Satorra and Saris published, along with Dag Sörbom, a paper suggesting a
different approach—the Expected Parameter Change (EPC) (Saris et al. 1987), while in
2009 they proved, together with Van der Veld, that the Chi-square test and the fit indices
could not be trusted due to serious misspecifications which may not be detected and minor
errors which may lead to a rejection of the model (Saris et al. 2009).
The issues which were discussed in this article reflect the fundamental problems which
researchers may face in the analysis of complex social phenomena and structural equation
modeling. Solving these problems, on the one hand, consists in optimization possibilities of
theoretical models but, on the other hand, it comes down to a selection of appropriate
technical tools in the diagnosis of the examined reality. SEM focuses namely on two
sources, i.e., theoretical and technical. The most important sources are the theoretical
premises from which we derive both the hypothesis about the measurement and the
structural part of the SEM model. The hypotheses specify which parameters can obtain a
given value (e.g., zero) and which parameters should be estimated on the basis of empirical
data. The second source, in turn, does not result from the theoretical assumption of the
examined phenomenon which the model should describe but from strictly technical reasons
which, in most cases, focus on a description of parameter quality and model fit to the
empirical data or on the description of relationships between measurement errors which
occur naturally (or at least do not contradict the theory of the modeled phenomenon).
However, in the end the basis for the evaluation and acceptance of the theoretical model, in

123

342

P. Tarka

which we assume certain hypothetical directions, is the positive result of the conducted
procedure, which verifies the research hypothesis.
The technical issues of SEM became so unrealistic and complex that nobody pays much
attention to the theoretical assumptions in SEM anymore, and technology tends to overshadow common sense (Freedman 1987). As a result, correct use of SEM is rare. The use
of SEM has turned into a kind of fetish or numerical trick whose ultimate aim is to
maximize the model fit to the data instead of using carefully differentiated research plans
and careful substantive considerations on the grounds of theory. Steiger (2001) warned that
this tendency has spread even in many published books which introduce SEM as an
analytical strategy. Consequently, the authors of these publications are either unaware of
the important technical issues of using SEM or they do not want to alienate the potential
users of this analytical strategy. Even if the books carefully present the limitations of SEM,
the practitioners have a prevailing tendency not to notice or even ignore these limitations.
Hence the use of SEM in the social sciences is full of overuse, incorrect interpretation and
overinterpretation. The risks are not posed by the SEM model itself but by the researchers’
lack of awareness of the SEM model’s complexity and limitations.
With reference to all of the above-mentioned advantages and disadvantages of SEM
models and their application in the context of the social sciences, there are only two
possible answers. We can either stop using SEM or work on the improvement of the
practices of using this analytical strategy. Calling for an end to the use of SEM has little
chance of gaining positive feedback from researchers, as SEM is too valuable and we
cannot reject it. It seems that the only correct solution is to work on improving the use of
this analytical strategy and obtaining an appropriate reference to it from the perspective of
the analyzed data and the considered theories. As a result of these actions, SEM models
will lead to better cognitive conclusions and correct results on the basis of the conducted
empirical research.
Acknowledgements I would like to thank prof. David Kenny for his comments of an early draft of this
paper, as well as two anonymous reviewers for their valuable insights.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References
Abbott, A.: The causal devolution. Sociol. Methods Res. 27, 148–181 (1998)
Aldrich, J.: Autonomy. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 41, 15–34 (1989)
Anderson, J.C., Gerbing, D.W.: Structural equation modeling in practice: a review and recommended twostep approach. Psychol. Bull. 108, 411–423 (1988)
Anderson, T.W., Rubin, H.: Statistical inference in factor analysis. In: Proceedings of the Third Berkeley
Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, University of California Press (1956)
Arbuckle, J.L.: Amos—16: User’s Guide. SPSS, Chicago (2007)
Arbuckle, J.L., Wothke, W.: AMOS—User’s Guide. Marketing Department, SPSS Incorporporated, Chicago (1999)
Arminger, G., Muthén, B.O.: A bayesian approach to nonlinear latent variable models using the gibbs
sampler and the metropolis-hastings algorithm. Psychometrika 63, 271–300 (1998)
Arminger, G., Schoenberg, R.J.: Pseudo maximum likelihood estimation and a test for misspecification in
mean and covariance structure models. Psychometrika 54, 409–425 (1989)
Bagozzi, R.P.: Causal Models in Marketing. Wiley, New York (1980)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

343

Bagozzi, R.P.: Issues in the application of covariance structure analysis: a further comment. J. Consum. Res.
9, 449–450 (1983a)
Bagozzi, R.P.: A holistic methodology for modeling consumer response to innovation. Oper. Res. 31,
128–176 (1983b)
Bagozzi, R.P., Yi, Y.: On the evaluation of structural equation models. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 16, 74–94 (1988)
Barrett, P.: Structural equation modeling: adjudging model fit. Personal. Individ. Differ. 42, 815–824 (2007)
Bartholomew, D.J.: Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis. Oxford University Press, New York (1987)
Basmann, R.: A generalized classical method of linear estimation of coefficients in a structural equation.
Econometrica 25, 77–83 (1957)
Baumgartner, H., Homburg, C.: Applications of structural equation modeling in marketing and consumer
research: a review. Int. J. Res. Mark. 13, 139–161 (1996)
Becker, B.J.: Using results from replicated studies to estimate linear models. J. Educ. Stat. 17, 341–362
(1992)
Becker, B.J., Fahrbach, K.: A comparison of approaches to the synthesis of correlation matrices. In: Annual
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans (1994)
Becker, B.J., Schram, C.M.: Examining explanatory models through research synthesis. In: Cooper, H.,
Hedges, L.V. (eds.) Handbook of Research Synthesis, pp. 357–381. Russell Sage Foundation, New
York (1994)
Beckman, L.R., Aizenberg, R., Forsythe, A.B., Day, T.: A theoretical analysis of antecedents of young
couples’ fertility decisions and outcomes. Demography 20, 519–533 (1983)
Belsley, D.A.: Conditioning Diagnostics: Collinearity and Weak Data in Regression. Wiley, New York
(1991)
Bentler, P.M.: Structural modeling and the scientific method: comments on Freedman’s critique. J. Educ.
Stat. 12, 151–157 (1987)
Bentler, P.M.: Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychol. Bull. 107, 238–246 (1990)
Bentler, P.M., Bonett, D.G.: Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance structures.
Psychol. Bull. 88, 588–606 (1980)
Bentler, P.M., Chou, C.P.: Practical issues in structural modeling. Sociol. Method Res. 16, 78–117 (1987)
Bentler, P.M., Chou, C.P.: Practical issues in structural modeling. In: Long, J.S. (ed.) Common Problems/
Proper Solutions: Avoiding Error in Quantitative Research, pp. 161–192. Sage Publications, Beverly
Hills (1993)
Bentler, P.M.: Theory and implementation of EQS: A structural equations program. BMDP Statistical
Software (1985)
Bentler, P.M., Speckart, G.: Attitudes ‘cause’ behaviors: a structural equation perspective. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 40, 226–238 (1981)
Bentler, P.M., Stein, J.A.: Structural equation models in medical research. Stat. Methods Med. Res. 1,
159–181 (1992)
Bentler, P.M., Weeks, D.G.: Linear structural equations with latent variables. Psychometrika 45, 289–308
(1980)
Bentler, P.M., Lee, S.-Y., Weng, L.-J.: Multiple population covariance structure analysis under arbitrary
distribution theory. Commun. Stat. Theory Method 16, 1951–1964 (1987)
Biesanz, J.C., Deeb-Sossa, N., Papadakis, A.A., Bollen, K.A., Curran, P.J.: The role of coding time in
estimating and interpreting growth curve models. Psychol. Methods 9, 30–52 (2004)
Blalock, H.M.: Correlation and causality: the multivariate case. Soc. Forces 39, 246–251 (1961a)
Blalock, H.M.: Causal Inferences in Nonexperimental Research. Norton, New York (1961b)
Blalock, H.M.: Four-variable causal models and partial correlations. Am. J. Sociol. 68, 182–194 (1962)
Blalock, H.M.: Making causal inferences for unmeasured variables from correlations among indicators. Am.
J. Sociol. 69, 53–62 (1963)
Blalock, H.M.: Causal Inferences in Nonexperimental Research. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
(1964)
Blalock, H.M.: Multiple indicators and the causal approach to measurement error. Am. J. Sociol. 75,
264–273 (1969)
Blalock, H.M.: Causal Models in The Social Sciences. Aldine-Atherton, Chicago (1971)
Blalock, H.M.: Are there really any constructive alternatives to causal modeling? Sociol. Methodol. 21,
325–335 (1991)
Bock, R.D., Bergman, R.E.: Analysis of covariance structures. Psychometrika 31, 507–534 (1966)
Bock, R.D., Lieberman, M.: Fitting a response model for n dichotomously scored items. Psychometrika 35,
179–197 (1970)
Bollen, K.A.: Structural Equations with Latent Variables. Wiley, New York (1989a)

123

344

P. Tarka

Bollen, K.A.: A new incremental fix index for general structural equation models. Sociol. Methods Res. 17,
303–316 (1989b)
Bollen, K.A.: Liberal democracy: validity and method factors in cross-national measures. Am. J. Pol. Sci.
11, 1207–1230 (1993)
Bollen, K.A., Curran, P.J.: Latent Curve Models: A Structural Equation Perspective. Wiley, New York
(2006)
Bollen, K.A., Long, J.S.: Testing Structural Equation Models. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills (1993)
Bollen, K.A., Stine, R.A.: Bootstrapping goodness-of-fit measures in structural equation models. Sociol.
Methods Res. 21, 205–229 (1992)
Boomsma, A.: On the robustness Of LISREL (Maximum Likelihood Estimation) against small sample size
and non-normality. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Groningen, University of Groningen (1983)
Boomsma, A., Hoogland, J.J.: The robustness of LISREL modeling revised. In: Cudeck, R., DuToit, S.,
Sörbom, D. (eds.) Structural Equation Modeling: Present and Future, pp. 139–168. Scientific Software
International, Lincolnwood (2001)
Boudon, R.: A method of linear causal analysis: dependence analysis. Am. Sociol. Rev. 30, 365–374 (1965)
Breckler, S.J.: Applications of covariance structure modeling in psychology:Cause for concern? Psychol.
Bull. 107, 260–370 (1990)
Brown, S.P., Peterson, R.A.: Antecedents and consequences of salesperson job satisfaction: meta-analysis
and assessment of causal effects. J. Mark. Res. 30, 63–77 (1993)
Browne, M.W.: Generalized least-squares estimators in the analysis of covariance structures. S. Afr. Stat. J.
8, 1–24 (1974)
Browne, M.W.: Covariance structures. In: Howkins, D.M. (ed.) Topics in Applied Multivariate Analysis,
pp. 72–141. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1982)
Browne, M.W.: Asymptotically distribution-free methods for the analysis of covariance structures. Br.
J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 37, 62–83 (1984)
Browne, M.W.: Cross-validation methods. J. Math. Psychol. 44, 108–132 (2000a)
Browne, M.W.: Psychometrics. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 95, 661–665 (2000b)
Browne, M.W., Arminger, G.: Specification and estimation of mean and covariance structure models. In:
Arminger, G., Clogg, C.C., Sobel, M.E. (eds.) Handbook of Statistical Modeling for the Social and
Behavioral Sciences, pp. 185–249. Plenum, New York (1995)
Browne, M.W., Cudeck, R.: Single sample cross-validation indices for covariance structures. Multivar.
Behav. Res. 25, 181–185 (1993)
Browne, M.W., Mels, G.: RAMONA User’s Guide. Unpublished Report. Columbus, Department of Psychology, Ohio State University (1990)
Browne, M.W., MacCallum, R.C., Kim, C.-T., Andersen, B.L., Glaser, R.: When fit indices and residuals are
incompatible. Psychol. Methods 7, 403–421 (2002)
Bryk, A.S., Raudenbush, S.W.: Application of hierarchical linear models to assessing change. Psychol. Bull.
101, 147–158 (1987)
Bryk, A.S., Raudenbush, S.W., Congdon, R.: HLM 4 for Windows. Scientific Software International,
Chicago (1996)
Bynner, J.M., Romney, D.M.: Intelligence, fact or artefact: alternative structures for cognitive abilities. Br.
J. Educ. Psychol. 56, 13–23 (1986)
Byrne, B.M.: Structural Equation Modeling with Amos: Basic Concepts, Applications and Programming.
Multivariate Applications Series. Routledge, London (2010)
Cartwright, N.: Nature’s Capacities and Their Measurement. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1989)
Cartwright, N.: Probabilities and experiments. J. Econ. 67, 47–59 (1995)
Cartwright, N.: The Dappled World: a Study of the Boundaries of Science. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1999)
Cartwright, N.: Against the completability of science. In: Stone, M.W.F., Wolff, J. (eds.) The Proper
Ambition of Science, pp. 209–222. Routledge, London (2001)
Chassin, L., Pillow, D.R., Curran, P.J., Molina, B.S.G., Barrera Jr., M.: Relation of parental alcoholism to
early adolescent substance use: a test of three mediating mechanism. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 102, 3–19
(1993)
Chen, M.-S., Land, K.C.: Testing the health belief model—LISREL analysis of alternative models of causal
relationships between health beliefs and preventive dental behavior. Soc. Psychol. Q. 49, 45–60 (1986)
Cheung, M.W.L., Chan, W.: Meta-analytic structural equation modeling: a two-stage approach. Psychol.
Methods 10, 40–64 (2005)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

345

Cheung, S.F.: Examining solutions to two practical issues. In: Meta-analysis: dependent correlations and
missing data in correlation matrices. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Chinese University of Hong
Kong (2000)
Cheung, M.W.L.: Meta-analysis for structural equation modeling: a two-stage approach. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Chinese University of Hong Kong (2002)
Chin, W.W., Peterson, R.A., Brown, S.P.: Structural equation modeling in marketing: some practical
reminders. J. Mark. Theory Pract. 16, 287–298 (2008)
Chou, C.-P., Bentler, P.M.: Model modification in covariance structure modelling: a comparison among
likelihood ratio, lagrange multiplier and Wald tests. Multivar. Behav. Res. 25, 115–136 (1990)
Christoffersson, A.: Factor analysis of dichotomized variables. Psychometrika 40, 5–32 (1975)
Cliff, N.: Some cautions concerning the application of causal modelling methods. Multivar. Behav. Res. 18,
115–126 (1983)
Cohen, J., Cohen, P.: Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis For The Behavioral Sciences.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale (1983)
Collingwood, R.G.: An Essay on Metaphysics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1940)
Cook, T.D., Campbell, D.T.: Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues For Field Setting.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston (1979)
Corey, D.M., Dunlap, W.P., Burke, M.J.: Averaging correlations: expected values and bias in combined
Pearson and Fisher’s z transformations. J. Gen. Psychol. 125, 245–261 (1998)
Cortina, J.M., Chen, G., Dunlap, W.P.: Testing interaction effects in LISREL: examination and illustration
of available procedures. Organ. Res. Methods 4, 324–360 (2001)
Cox, D.R., Wermuth, N.: Causality: a statistical view. Int. Stat. Rev. 72, 285–305 (2004)
Cudeck, R., Henly, S.J.: Model selection in covariance structures analysis and the ‘problem’ of sample size:
a clarification. Psychol. Bull. 109, 512–519 (1991)
Curran, P.J., West, S.G., Finch, J.F.: The robustness of test statistics to nonnormality and specification error
in confirmatory factor analysis. Psychol. Methods 1, 16–29 (1996)
Dawid, A.P.: Causal inference without counterfactuals (with discussion). J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 95, 407–448
(2000)
Depaoli, S.: Mixture class recovery in GMM under varying degrees of class separation: frequentist versus
Bayesian estimation. Psychol. Methods 18, 186–219 (2013)
Draper, N.R., Smith, H.: Applied Regression Analysis. Wiley, New York (1981)
Duncan, W.J.: Physical Similarity and Dimensional Analysis. Edward Arnold, London (1966)
Duncan, O.D.: Introduction to Structural Equation Models. Academic Press, New York (1975)
Duncan, S.C., Duncan, T.E., Strycker, L.A.: Alcohol use from ages 9-16: a cohort-sequential latent growth
model. Drug Alcohol Depend. 81, 71–81 (2006)
Epstein, R.J.: A History of Econometrics. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1987)
Evans, D.M., Gillespie, N.A., Martin, N.G.: Biometrical genetics. Biol. Psychol. 61, 33–51 (2002)
Fisher, R.A.: Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Collier-MacMillan Publishers, London (1970)
Fornell, C.: Issues in the application of covariance structure analysis. J. Consum. Res. 9, 443–448 (1983)
Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F.: Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and measurement errors. J. Mark. Res. 18, 39–50 (1981)
Fouladi, R.T.: Covariance structure analysis techniques under conditions of multivariate normality and
nonnormality modified and bootstrap based test statistics. In: Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, April 13–17 (1998)
Fox, J.: Statistical data analysis and social science. In: Conference on Social Science and Statistics in
Honour of the late Clifford, C. Clogg, (1997)
Fox, J.: Structural equation modeling with the SEM package in R. Struct. Equ. Model. 13, 465–486 (2006)
Frank, K.A.: Impact of a confounding variable on a regression coefficient. Sociol. Methods Res. 29,
147–194 (2000)
Freedman, D.A.: As others see us: a case study of path analysis. J. Educ. Stat. 12, 267–269 (1987)
Freedman, D.A.: Statistical models and shoe leather. Sociol. Methodol. 21, 291–313 (1991)
Freedman, D.A.: From association to causation via regression. In: McKim, C., Turner, S. (eds.) Causality in
Crisis, pp. 201–248. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame (1997)
Freedman, D.A.: Statistical models for causation: what inferential leverage do they provide? Eval. Rev. 30,
713–791 (2006)
Frish, R.: Statistical confluence analysis by means of complete regression systems. Universitetets Økonomiske Institutt, Oslo (1934)
Frish, R., Waugh, F.: Partial time regressions as compared with individual trends. Econometrica 1, 387–401
(1933)

123

346

P. Tarka

Furlow, C.F., Beretvas, S.N.: Meta-analytic methods of pooling correlation matrices for structural equation
modeling under different patterns of missing data. Psychol. Methods 10, 227–254 (2005)
Gau, J.M.: Basic principles and practices of structural equation modeling in criminal justice and criminology
research. J. Crim. Justice Educ. 21, 136–151 (2010)
Gerbing, D.W., Anderson, J.C.: The effect of sampling error and model characteristics on parameter estimation for maximum likelihood confirmatory factor analysis. Multivar. Behav. Res. 20, 255–271
(1988)
Gibbs, J.J., Giever, D., Higgins, G.E.: A test of Gottfredson and Hirschi’s general theory using structural
equation modeling. Crim. Justice Behav. 30, 441–458 (2003)
Glymour, C.: Rabbit hunting. Synthese 121, 55–78 (1999)
Glymour, C., Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., Kelly, K.: Discovering Causal Structure: Artificial Intelligence,
Philosophy of Science, and Statistical Modeling. Academic Press, Orlando (1987)
Goldberger, A.S.: Econometric Theory. Wiley, New York (1964)
Goldberger, A.S.: Econometrics and psychometrics: a survey of communalities. Psychometrika 36, 83–107
(1971)
Goldberger, A.S.: Structural equation methods in the social sciences. Econometrica 40, 979–1001 (1972)
Goldberger, A.S., Duncan, O.D.: Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences. Academic Press, New
York (1973)
Goldstein, H.: Multilevel mixed linear model analysis using iterative generalized least squares. Biometrika
73, 43–56 (1986)
Goldstein, H., Browne, W.J.: Multilevel factor analysis modelling using markov chain monte carlo (MCMC)
estimation. In: Marcoulides, G., Moustaki, I. (eds.) Latent Variable and Latent Structure Models,
pp. 225–243. Lawrence Erlbaum, Englewood Cliffs (2002)
Goldstein, H., McDonald, R.P.: A general model for the analysis of multi-level data. Psychometrika 53,
455–467 (1988)
Golob, T.F.: Structural equation modeling for travel behavioral research. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 37,
1–25 (2003)
Green, S.B., Thompson, M.S., Poirier, J.: Exploratory analyses to improve model fit: errors due to misspecification and a strategy to reduce their occurrence. Struct. Equ. Model. 6, 113–126 (1999)
Grewal, R., Cote, J.A., Baumgartner, H.: Multicollinearity and measurement error in structural equation
model: implications for theory testing. Mark. Sci. 23, 519–529 (2004)
Gulliksen, H.: Theory of Mental Tests. Wiley, New York (1950)
Haavelmo, T.: The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous equations. Econometrica 11, 1–12
(1943)
Haavelmo, T.: The probability approach in econometrics. Econometrica 12, 1–114 (1944)
Hafdahl, A.R.: Multivariate meta-analysis for exploratory factor analytic research. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (2001)
Hancock, G.R., Nevitt, J.: Bootstrapping and the identification of exogenous latent variables within structural equation models. Struct. Equ. Model. 6, 394–399 (1999)
Hanushek, E.A., Jackson, J.E.: Statistical Methods for Social Scientists. Academic Press, New York (1977)
Harman, H.: Modern Factor Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1960)
Hauser, R.M., Goldberger, A.S.: The treatment of unobservable variables in path analysis. Sociol. Methodol.
3, 81–117 (1971)
Hausman, J.A.: Specification test in econometrics. Econometrica 46, 1251–1271 (1978)
Hayduk, L.A.: Structural Equation Modeling with LISREL: Essentials and Advances. The John Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore (1987)
Hayduk, L.A.: Should model modification be oriented toward improving data fit or encouraging creative and
analytic thinking? Multivar. Behav. Res. 25, 193–196 (1990)
Heckman, J.J.: The scientific model of causality. Sociol. Methodol. 35, 1–97 (2005)
Heckman, J.J.: Econometric causality. Int. Stat. Rev. 76, 1–27 (2008)
Hempel, C.G.: Aspects of Scientific Explanation, and other Essays in the Philosophy of Science. Free Press,
New York (1965)
Holland, P.W.: Statistics and causal inference. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 81, 945–960 (1986)
Holland, P.W.: Causal inference, path analysis and recursive structural equation models. In: Clogg, C. (ed.)
Sociological Methodology, pp. 449–484. American Sociological Association, Washington (1988)
Holland, P.W.: Some reflections on Freedman’s critique. Found. Sci. 1, 50–57 (1995)
Hooper, D., Coughlan, J., Mullen, M.: Structural equation modelling: guidelines for determining model fit.
Electron. J. Bus. Res. Methods 6, 53–60 (2008)
Hotelling, H.: Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. J. Educ. Psychol. 24,
417–441 (1933)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

347

Howe, W.G.: Some Contributions to Factor Analysis. Report No. 0RNL-1919, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee (1955)
Hu, L.T., Bentler, P.M.: Cutoff Criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: conventional criteria
versus new alternatives. Struct. Equ. Model. 6, 1–55 (1999)
Hu, L.T., Bentler, P.M., Kano, Y.: Can test statistics in covariance structure analysis be trusted? Psychol.
Bull. 112, 351–362 (1992)
Hui, S.L., Berger, J.O.: Empirical Bayes estimation of rates in longitudinal studies. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 78,
753–760 (1983)
Hulland, J., Chow, Y.H., Lam, S.: Use of causal models in marketing research: a review. Int. J. Res. Mark.
13, 181–197 (1996)
Hume, D.: A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford University Press, Cambridge (1999)
Humphreys, P., Freedman, D.: The grand leap. Br. J. Philos. Sci. 47, 113–123 (1996)
Hunter, J.E., Schmidt, F.L.: Methods of Meta-Analysis: Correcting Error and Bias in Research Findings.
Sage Publications, Newbury Park (1990)
Hunter, J.E., Schmidt, F.L.: Methods of meta-analysis: correcting error and bias in research findings. Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks (2004)
Irzik, G., Meyer, E.: Causal modeling: new directions for statistical explanation. Philos. Sci. 54, 495–514
(1987)
Issac, P.D.: Linear regression, structural relations and measurement errors. Psychol. Bull. 74, 213–218
(1970)
James, L.R.: The unmeasured variable problem in path analysis. J. Appl. Psychol. 65, 415–421 (1980)
James, L.R., Mulaik, S.A., Brett, J.M.: Causal Analysis: Assumptions, Models and Data. Sage Publications,
Beverly Hills (1982)
Jennrich, R.I., Clarkson, D.B.: A feasible method for standard errors of estimate in maximum likelihood
factor analysis. Psychometrika 45, 237–247 (1980)
Jennrich, R.I., Robinson, S.M.: A Newton–Raphson algorithm for maximum likelihood factor analysis.
Psychometrika 34, 111–123 (1969)
Jennrich, R.I., Sampson, P.F.: Rotation for simple loadings. Psychometrika 31, 313–323 (1966)
Jöreskog, K.G.: A general approach to confirmatory maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika 34,
183–202 (1969)
Jöreskog, K.G.: A general method for analysis of covariance structures. Biometrika 57, 239–251 (1970)
Jöreskog, K.G.: Simultaneous factor analysis in several populations. Psychometrika 36, 409–426 (1971)
Jöreskog, K.G.: A general method for estimating a linear structural equation system. In: Goldberger, A.S.,
Duncan, O.D. (eds.) Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences, pp. 83–112. Academic Press,
New York (1973)
Jöreskog, K.G., Sorböm, D.: PRELIS: User’s Reference Guide. SSI, Lincolnwood (1996)
Jöreskog, K.G., Sörbom, D.: LISREL: A General Computer Program for Estimation of a Linear Structural
Equation System by Maximum Likelihood Methods. National Educational Resources, Chicago (1978)
Jöreskog, K.G., Sörbom, D.: LISREL 8: Structural Equation Modeling with the SIMPLIS Command
Language. SSI, Chicago (1993)
Jöreskog, K.G., Gruvaeus, G.T., Van Thillo, M.: ACOVS: a general computer program for analysis of
covariance structures. ETS Res. Bull. Ser. 1970, 1–54 (1970)
Kaiser, H.F.: The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis. Psychometrika 23, 187–200
(1958)
Kaplan, D.: Estimator conditioning diagnostics for covariance structure models. Sociol. Methods Res. 23,
200–229 (1994)
Kaplan, D.: Statistical power in structural equation modeling. In: Hoyle, R.H. (ed.) Structural Equation Modeling: Concepts, Issues, and Applications, pp. 100–117. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks
(1995)
Kaplan, D., Depaoli, S.: Bayesian statistical methods. In: Little, T.D. (ed.) Oxford Handbook of Quantitative
Methods, pp. 407–437. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2013)
Karimi, L., Meyer, D.: Structural equation modeling in psychology: the history, development and current
challenges. Int. J. Psychol. Stud. 6, 123–133 (2014)
Keesling, W.: Maximum likelihood approaches to causal flow analysis. PhD thesis. University Press,
Chicago (1972)
Kelloway, B.K.: Using LISREL for Structural Equation Modeling: A Researcher’s Guide. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (1998)
Kenny, D.A.: Correlation and Causality. Wiley, New York (1979)
Kenny, D., Judd, C.M.: Estimating the nonlinear and interactive effects of latent variables. Psychol. Bull. 96,
201–210 (1984)

123

348

P. Tarka

Kenny, D.A., McCoach, D.B.: Effect of the number of variables on measures of fit in structural equation
modeling. Struct. Equ. Model. 10, 333–351 (2003)
Kenny, D.A., Kashy, D.A., Bolger, N.: Data analysis in social psychology. In: Gilbert, D., Fiske, S.,
Lindzey, G. (eds.) Handbook of Social Psychology, pp. 233–265. McGraw-Hill, New York (1998)
Kim, S.Y., Suh, Y., Kim, J.S., Albanese, M., Langer, M.M.: Single and multiple ability estimation in the
SEM framework: a non-informative Bayesian estimation approach. Multivar. Behav. Res. 48, 563–591
(2013)
Klein, L.R.: Economic Fluctuations in the United States 1921–1941. Wiley, New York (1950)
Kline, R.B.: Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. Guilford Press, New York (2011)
Kohn, M., Schooler, C.: Job conditions and personality: a longitudinal assessment of their reciprocal effects.
Am. J. Sociol. 87, 1257–1286 (1982)
Koopmans, T.: Statistical estimation of simultaneous economic relations. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 40, 448–466
(1945)
Koopmans, T.C.: Identification problems in economic model construction. Econometrica 17, 125–143
(1949)
Koopmans, T., Rubin, H., Leipnik, R.: Measuring the equation systems of dynamic economics. In: Koopmans, T. (ed.) Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, pp. 53–237. Cowles Commission
Monograph, John Wiley, New York (1950)
Landis, R.S.: Successfully combining meta-analysis and structural equation modeling: recommendations
and strategies. J. Bus. Psychol. 28, 251–261 (2013)
Lawley, D.N.: The estimation of factor loadings by the method of maximum likelihood. Proc. R. Stat. Soc.
Edinb. 60, 64–82 (1940)
Lawley, D.N.: The application of the maximum likelihood method to factor analysis. Br. J. Psychol. 33,
172–175 (1943)
Lawley, D.N.: Estimation in factor analysis under various initial assumptions. Br. J. Stat. Psychol. 11, 1–12
(1958)
Lawley, D.N.: Some new results in maximum likelihood factor analysis. Proc. R. Stat. Soc. Edinb. 67,
256–264 (1967)
Lawley, D.N., Maxwell, A.E.: Factor Analysis as a Statistical Method. Butterworth, London (1963)
Leamer, E.E.: Specification Searches: Ad hoc Inference with Non-experimental Data. Wiley, New York
(1978)
Lee, S.-Y.: Multilevel analysis of structural equation models. Biometrika 77, 763–772 (1990)
Lee, S.-Y., Song, X.-Y., Poon, W.-Y.: Comparison of approaches in estimating interaction and quadratic
effects of latent variables. Multivar. Behav. Res. 39, 37–67 (2004)
Li, C.C.: The concept of path coefficient and its impact on population genetics. Biometrics 12, 190–210
(1956)
Li, C.C.: Path Analysis: A Primer. Boxworth Press, Pacific Grove (1975)
Liang, J., Bentler, P.M.: An EM algorithm for fitting two-level structural equation models. Psychometrika
69, 101–122 (2004)
Linhart, H., Zucchini, W.: Model Selection. Wiley, New York (1986)
Linver, M.R., Brooks-Gunn, J., Kohen, D.E.: Family processes as pathways from income to young children’s development. Dev. Psychol. 38, 719–734 (2002)
Little, T.D., Card, N.A., Bovaird, J.A., Preacher, K.J., Crandall, C.S.: Structural equation modeling of
mediation and moderation with contextual factors. In: Little, T.D., Bovaird, J.A., Card, N.A. (eds.)
Modeling Contextual Effects in Longitudinal Studies, pp. 207–230. LEA, New York (2007)
Liu, B., De la Fuente, A., Hoeschele, I.: Gene network inference via structural equation modeling in
genetical genomics experiements. Genetics 178, 1763–1776 (2008)
Long, J.S., Trivedi, P.K.: Some specification tests for linear regression model. In: Bollen, K.A., Long, J.S.
(eds.) Testing Structural Equation Models, pp. 66–110. Sage Publications, Newbury Park (1993)
Longford, N.T.: A fast scoring algorithm for maximum likelihood estimation in unbalanced mixed models
with nested random effects. Biometrika 74, 817–827 (1987)
MaaCallum, R.C., Wegener, D.T., Uchino, B.N., Fabrigar, L.R.: The problem of equivalent models in
applications of covariance structure analysis. Psychol. Bull. 114, 185–199 (1993)
MaCallum, R.C.: Working with imperfect models. Multivar. Behav. Res. 38, 113–139 (2003)
MaCallum, R.C., Austin, J.T.: Applications of structural equation modeling in psychological research.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 51, 201–226 (2000)
MacCallum, R.C.: Specification searches in covariance structure modeling. Psychol. Bull. 100, 107–120
(1986)
MacCallum, R.C.: The need for alternative measures of fit in covariance structure modeling. Multivar.
Behav. Res. 25, 157–162 (1990)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

349

MacCallum, R.C., Tucker, L.R.: Representing sources of error in the common factor model: implications for
theory and practice. Psychol. Bull. 109, 501–511 (1991)
MacCallum, R.C., Roznowski, M., Necowitz, L.B.: Model modification in covariance structure analysis: the
problem of capitalization on chance. Psychol. Bull. 111, 490–504 (1992)
MacCallum, R.C., Browne, M.W., Sugawara, H.M.: Power analysis and determination of sample size for
covariance structure modeling. Psychol. Methods 1, 130–149 (1996)
Mann, H.B., Wald, A.: On the statistical treatment of linear stochastic difference equations. Econometrica
11, 173–220 (1943)
Marcoulides, G.A.: Modern Methods for Business Research. Psychology Press, New York (2013)
Marini, M.M., Singer, B.: Causality in the social science. In: Clogg, C. (ed.) Sociological Methodology,
pp. 347–409. American Sociological Association, Washington (1998)
Marsh, H.W., Dawson, M., Pietsch, J., Walker, R.: Overcoming problems in confirmatory factor analyses of
MTMM data: the correlated uniqueness model and factorial invariance. Multivar. Behav. Res. 27,
489–507 (2004a)
Marsh, H.W., Wen, Z., Hau, K.-T.: In search of golden rules: comment on hypothesis-testing approaches to
setting cutoff values for fit indexes and dangers in overgeneralizing Hu and Bentler’s (1999) findings.
Struct. Equ. Model. 11, 320–341 (2004b)
Mason, W.M., Wong, G.Y., Entwisle, B.: Contextual analysis through the multilevel linear model. Sociol.
Methodol. 14, 72–103 (1983)
Matsueda, R.L.: Testing control theory and differential association: a causal modeling approach. Am.
Sociol. Rev. 47, 489–504 (1982)
Matsueda, R.L.: Key advances in the history of structural equation modeling. In: Hoyle, R.H. (ed.)
Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling, pp. 17–42. Guilford Press, New York (2012)
Matsueda, R.L., Bielby, W.T.: Statistical power in covariance structure models. In: Tuma, N.B. (ed.)
Sociological Methodology, pp. 120–158. American Sociological Association, Washington (1986)
Matsueda, R.L., Heimer, K.: Race, family structure, and delinquency: a test of differential association and
social control theories. Am. Sociol. Rev. 52, 826–840 (1987)
Mauro, R.: Understanding L.O.V.E. (left out variable error): a method for estimating the effects of omitted
variables. Psychol. Bull. 108, 314–329 (1990)
McArdle, J.J., Epstein, D.: Latent growth curves within developmental structural equation models. Child
Dev. 58, 110–133 (1987)
McArdle, J.J., Hamagami, F.: Multilevel models from a multiple group structural equation perspective. In:
Marcoulides, G.A., Schumaker, R.E. (eds.) Advanced Structural Equation Modeling: Issues and
Techniques, pp. 89–124. Erlbaum, Mahwah (1996)
McArdle, J.J., McDonald, R.P.: Some algebraic properties of the reticular action model for moment
structures. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 37, 234–251 (1984)
McDonald, R.P.: Nonlinear factor analysis. Psychometric Monographs 15, Psychometric Society, Richmond
(1967)
McDonald, R.P.: A simple comprehensive model for the analysis of covariance structures. Br. J. Math. Stat.
Psychol. 31, 59–72 (1978)
McDonald, R.P.: Exploratory and confirmatory nonlinear factor analysis. In: Wainer, W.H., Messick, S.
(eds.) Principles of Modern Psychological Measurement: Festschrift for Frederick M. Lord,
pp. 197–213. Erlbaum, Hillsdale (1983)
McDonald, R.P.: A general model for two-level data with responses missing at random. Psychometrika 58,
575–585 (1993)
McDonald, R.P.: The Bilevel reticular action model for path analysis with latent variables. Sociol. Methods
Res. 22, 399–413 (1994)
McDonald, R.P.: The specific analysis of structural equation models. Multivar. Behav. Res. 39, 687–713
(2004)
McDonald, R.P., Goldstein, H.: Balanced versus unbalanced designs for linear structural relations in twolevel data. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 42, 215–232 (1989)
Meehl, P.E., Waller, N.G.: The path analysis controversy: a new statistical approach to strong appraisal of
verisimilitude. Psychol. Methods 2, 283–300 (2002)
Meredith, W., Tisak, J.: Latent curve analysis. Psychometrika 55, 107–122 (1990)
Meredith, W., Tisak, J.: ‘Tuckerizing’ growth curves. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Psychometric Society, Santa Barbara, CA, July (1984)
Miller, N., Pollock, V.E.: Meta-analytic synthesis for theory development. In: Cooper, H., Hedges, L.V.
(eds.) The Handbook of Research Synthesis, pp. 457–483. Russell Sage Foundation, New York (1994)

123

350

P. Tarka

Mooijaart, A., Bentler, P.M.: (1986) Random polynomial factor analysis. In: Diday, W.E. (ed.) Proceedings
of Fourth International Symposium: Data Analysis and Informatics, pp. 249–258. Elsevier Science
Publishers, Amsterdam (1986)
Mosier, C.I.: Determining a simple structure when loadings for certain tests are known. Psychometrika 4,
149–162 (1939)
Moulder, B.C., Algina, J.: Comparison of methods for estimating latent variable interactions. Struct. Equ.
Model. 9, 1–19 (2002)
Mulaik, S.A., James, L.R.: Objectivity and reasoning in science and structural equation modeling. In: Hoyle,
R.H. (ed.) Structural Equation Modeling: Concepts, Issues, and Applications, pp. 118–137. Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks (1995)
Mulaik, S.A., James, L.R., Van Alstine, J., Bennet, N., Lind, S., Stilwell, C.D.: Evaluation of goodness-of-fit
indices for structural equation models. Psychol. Bull. 105, 430–445 (1989)
Muthen, B.O.: Response to freedman’s critique of path analysis: improve credibility by better methodological training. J. Educ. Stat. 10, 178–184 (1987)
Muthén, B.O.: Contributions to factor analysis of dichotomous variables. Psychometrika 43, 551–560 (1978)
Muthén, B.O.: A structural probit model with latent variables. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 74, 807–811 (1979)
Muthén, B.O.: Latent variable structural equation model with categorical data. J. Econ. 22, 48–65 (1983)
Muthén, B.O.: A general structural equation model with dichotomous, ordered categorical and continuous
latent variable indicators. Psychometrika 49, 115–132 (1984)
Muthén, B.O.: LISCOMP: Analysis of Linear Structural Equations with a Comprehensive Measurement
Model. Scientific Software, Mooresville (1987)
Muthén, B.O.: Latent variable modeling in heterogeneous populations. Psychometrika 54, 557–585 (1989a)
Muthén, B.O.: Multiple group structural modelling with nonnormal continuous variables. Br. J. Math. Stat.
Psychol. 42, 55–62 (1989b)
Muthén, B.O.: Mean and covariance structure analysis of hierarchical data. UCLA Statistics Preprint 62,
UCLA, Department of Statistics, Los Angeles (1990)
Muthén, B.O.: Multilevel factor analysis of class and student achievement components. J. Educ. Meas. 28,
338–354 (1991)
Muthén, B.O.: Multilevel covariance structure analysis. Sociol. Methods Res. 22, 376–398 (1994)
Muthén, B.O.: Modeling of longitudinal and multi-level data. In: Raftery, A.E. (ed.) Sociological
Methodology, pp. 453–480. Blackwell, Boston (1997)
Muthén, B.O.: Second-generation structural equation modeling with a combination of categorical and
continuous latent variables. In: Collins, L., Sayer, A. (eds.) New Methods for the Analysis of Change,
pp. 291–322. APA, Washington (2001)
Muthén, B.O.: Beyond SEM: general latent variable modeling. Behaviormetrika 29, 81–117 (2002)
Muthén, B.O.: Latent variable analysis: growth mixture modeling and related techniques for longitudinal
data. In: Kaplan, D. (ed.) Handbook of Quantitative Methodology for the Social Sciences, pp. 345–368.
Sage Publications, Newbury Park (2004)
Muthén, B.O.: Bayesian analysis in Mplus: a brief introduction. Technical Report. Version 3 (2010)
Muthén, L.K., Muthén, B.O.: Mplus User’s Guide. Muthén & Muthén, Los Angeles (1998)
Muthén, B.O., Satorra, A.: Complex sample data in structural equation modeling. In: Marsden, P.V. (ed.)
Sociological Methodology, pp. 267–316. The American Sociological Association, Washington (1995)
Muthén, B., du Toit, S.H.C., Spisic, D.: Robust inference using weighted least squares and quadratic
estimating equations in latent variable modeling with categorical and continuous outcomes (Technical
report). Univeristy of California, Los Angeles (1997)
Nagin, D.S., Land, K.C.: Age, criminal careers, and population heterogeneity: specification and estimation
of a nonparametric mixed poisson model. Criminology 31, 327–362 (1993)
Neale, M.C., Hunter, M.D., Pritikin, J.N., Zahery, M., Brick, T.R., Kirkpatrick, R.M., Estabrook, R., Bates,
T.C., Maes, H.H., Boker, S.M.: OpenMx 2.0: extended structural equation and statistical modeling.
Psychometrika 81, 535–549 (2016)
Nevitt, J., Hancock, G.R.: Evaluating small sample approaches for model test statistics in structural equation
modeling. Multivar. Behav. Res. 39, 439–478 (2001)
Newsom, J.T.: A multilevel structural equation model for dyadic data. Struct. Equ. Model. 9, 431–447
(2002)
Neyman, J., Pearson, E.: On the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical hypotheses. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A Contain. Pap. Math. Phys. Character 231, 289–337 (1933)
Niles, H.E.: Correlation, causation and Wright’s theory of path coefficients. Genetics 7, 258–273 (1922)
Niles, H.E.: The method of path coefficients: an answer to Wright. Genetics 7, 256–260 (1923)
Olsson, U.: Maximum likelihood estimation of the polychoric correlation coefficient. Psychometrika 44,
443–460 (1979)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

351

OpenMx Development Team.: OpenMx Documentation. Release 1.1.1-1785. http://openmx.psyc.virginia.
edu/docs/OpenMx/latest/ (2011)
Oud, J.H.L., Voelkle, M.C.: Continuous time analysis. In: Michalos, A.C. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Quality of
Life and Well-Being Research, pp. 1270–1274. Springer, Dordrecht (2014)
Pearl, J.: Graphs, causality, and structural equation models. Sociol. Methods Res. 27, 226–284 (1998)
Pearl, J.: Causality. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2000)
Pearl, J.: Causal inference in the health science: a conceptual introduction. Health Serv. Outcome Res.
Methodol. 2, 189–220 (2002)
Pearson, K.: On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. Philos. Mag. 6, 559–572 (1901a)
Pearson, K.: Mathematical contribution to the theory of evolution. VII. On the correlation of characters not
quantitatively measurable. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 195, 1–47 (1901b)
Poon, W.-Y., Lee, S.-Y.: Maximum likelihood estimation of multivariate polyserial and polychoric correlation coefficients. Psychometrika 52, 429–430 (1987)
Pratt, J.W., Schlaifer, R.: On the nature and discovery of structure. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 79, 9–21 (1984)
Pratt, J.W., Schlaifer, R.: On the interpretation and observation of laws. J. Econ. 39, 23–52 (1988)
Preacher, K.J., Wichman, A.L., MacCallum, R.C., Briggs, N.E.: Latent Growth Curve Modeling. Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks (2008)
Pugesek, B.H., Tomek, A., Von Eye, T.: Structural Equation Modeling—Applications in Ecological and
Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2003)
Rabe-Hesketh, S., Skrondal, A., Pickles, A.: Generalized multilevel structural equation modeling. Psychometrika 69, 167–190 (2004)
Raftery, A.E.: Bayesian model selection in structural equation models. In: Bollen, K.A., Long, J.S. (eds.)
Testing Structural Equation Models, pp. 163–180. Sage Publications, Newberry Park (1993)
Raftery, A.E.: Bayesian model selection in social research. In: Marsden, P.V. (ed.) Sociological Methodology, pp. 111–165. American Sociological Association, Washington (1995)
Raina, P., O’Donnell, M., Rosenbaum, P., Brehaut, J., Walter, S.D., Russell, D., Swinton, M., Zhu, B.,
Wood, E.: The health and well-being of caregivers of children with cerebral palsy. Pediatrics 115,
626–636 (2005)
Rao, C.R.: Some statistical methods for comparison of growth curves. Biometrika 51, 83–90 (1958)
Rao, P., Holt, D.: Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and economic performance. Manag. Sci.
Oper. 25, 898–916 (2005)
Raudenbush, S.W.: Comparing personal trajectories and drawing causal inferences from longitudinal data.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 52, 501–525 (2001)
Raudenbush, S.W., Bryk, A.S.: Hierarchical Linear Models. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (2002)
Rindskopf, D.: Structural equation models: empirical identification: heywood cases and related problems.
Sociol. Methods Res. 13, 109–119 (1984)
Rogosa, D.: Causal models do not support scientific conclusions: a comment in support of Freedman.
J. Educ. Stat. 12, 185–195 (1987)
Rogosa, D.: Myths about longitudinal research. In: Schaie, K.W., Campbell, R.T., Meredith, W., Rawlings,
S.C. (eds.) Methodological Issues in Aging Research, pp. 3–66. LEA, Mahwah (1988)
Rogosa, D.: Myths and methods myths about longitudinal research research plus supplemental questions. In:
Gottman, K.M. (ed.) The Analysis of Change, pp. 3–66. LEA, Mahwah (1995)
Rosenbaum, P.R.: Dropping out of high school in the United States: an observational study. J. Educ. Stat. 11,
207–224 (1986)
Rosenbaum, P.R., Rubin, D.B.: The central role of the propensity score in in observational studies for causal
effects. Biometrika 70, 41–55 (1983)
Rosseel, Y.: Lavaan: an R package for structural equation modeling. J. Stat. Softw. 48, 1–36 (2012)
Rovine, M.J., Molenaar, P.C.M.: A structural modeling approach to the random coefficients model. Multivar. Behav. Res. 35, 51–88 (2000)
Rovine, M.J., Molenaar, P.C.M.: A structural equations modeling approach to the general linear mixed
model. In: Collins, L., Sayer, A. (eds.) New Methods for the Analysis of Change, pp. 65–96. APA
Press, Washington (2001)
Rabe-Hesketh, S. Pickles, A., Skrondal, A.: GLLAMM Manual. Tech. rept. 2001/01. Department of Biostatistics and Computing, Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College, University of London (2001)
Sackett, P.R., Laczo, R.M., Lippe, Z.P.: Differential prediction and the use of multiple predictors: the
omitted variables problem. J. Appl. Psychol. 88, 1046–1056 (2003)
Sargan, J.: Estimation of economic relationships using instrumental variables. Econometrica 67, 557–586
(1958)
Saris, W.E., Satorra, A., Sörbom, D.: The detection and correction of specification errors in structural
equation models. Sociol. Methodol. 17, 105–129 (1987)

123

352

P. Tarka

Saris, W.E., Satorra, A., Van der Veld, W.M.: Testing structural equation models or detection of misspecifications? Struct. Equ. Model. 16, 561–582 (2009)
Sarris, W.E., Revilla, M.: Correction for measurement error in survey research: necessary and possible. Soc.
Indic. Res. 127, 1005–1020 (2016)
Satorra, A., Bentler, P.M.: Scaling corrections for Chi-Square statistics in covariance structure analysis.
American Statistical Association. In: Proceedings of Business and Economics Sections, , pp. 308–313.
American Statistical Association, Alexandria (1988)
Satorra, A., Bentler, P.M.: Corrections to test statistics and standard errors in covariance structure analysis.
In: Von Eye, A., Clogg, C.C. (eds.) Latent Variables Analysis: Applications for Developmental
Research, pp. 399–419. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks (1994)
Satorra, A., Bentler, P.M.: A scaled difference Chi square test statistics for moment structure analysis.
Psychometrika 66, 507–514 (2001)
Satorra, A., Saris, W.: Power of the likelihood ratio test in covariance structure analysis. Psychometrika 50,
83–90 (1985)
Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., Meek, C.: TETRAD II: Tools for Discovery. LEA, Hillsdale (1994)
Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., Meek, C., Richardson, T.: TETRAD 3 User’s Manual. Department of
Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh (1997)
Scheines, R., Hoijtink, H., Boomsma, A.: Bayesian estimation and testing of structural equation models.
Psychometrika 64, 37–52 (1999)
Schulze, R.: Meta-analysis: a comparison of approaches. Hogrefe and Huber Publishers, Toronto (2004)
Schumaker, R.E., Marcoulides, G.A.: Interaction and Nonlinear Effects in Structural Equation Modeling.
LEA, New York (1998)
Schwartz, G.: Estimating the dimension of a model. Ann. Stat. 6, 461–464 (1978)
Shadish, W.R.: Meta-analysis and the exploration of causal mediating processes: a primer of examples,
methods and issues. Psychol. Methods 1, 47–65 (1996)
Shipley, B.: Cause and Correlation in Biology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2000)
Shook, L.C., Ketchen, D.J., Hult, G.T.M., Kacmar, K.M.: An assessment of the use of structural equation
modeling in strategic management research. Strateg. Manag. J. 25, 397–404 (2004)
Simon, H.A.: Spurious correlation: a causal interpretation. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 49, 467–479 (1954)
Skrondal, A., Rabe-Hesketh, S.: Generalized latent variable modeling: multilevel, longitudinal and structural
equation models. Chapman and Hall, Boca Raton (2004)
Slutsky, E.: The summation of random causes as the source of cyclic processes. Econometrica 5, 105–146
(1937)
Sobel, M.E.: Causal inference in the social sciences. In: Arminger, G., Clogg, C.C., Sobel, M.E. (eds.)
Handbook of Statistical Modeling for the Social and Behavioral Sciences, pp. 1–38. Plenum Press,
New York (1995)
Sobel, M.E.: An introduction to causal inference. Sociol. Methods Res. 24, 353–379 (1996)
Sobel, M.E.: Causal inference in the social sciences. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 95, 647–651 (2000)
Sörbom, D.: A general method for studying differences in factor means and factor structures between
groups. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 27, 229–239 (1974)
Spearman, C.: General intelligence: objectively determined and measured. Am. J. Psychol. 5, 201–293
(1904)
Spearman, C.: The Abilities of Man. Macmillan, New York (1927)
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., Scheines, R.: Causation, Prediction and Search. The MIT Press, Cambridge (1993)
Spirtes, P., Richardson, T., Meek, C., Scheines, R., Glymour, C.: Using path diagrams as a structural
equation modeling tool. Sociol. Methods Res. 27, 182–225 (1995)
Stapleton, L.M.: An assessment of practical solutions for structural equation modeling with complex sample
data. Struct. Equ. Model. 13, 28–58 (2006)
Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., Baumgartner, H.: On the use of structural equation models for marketing modeling.
Int. J. Res. Mark. 17, 195–202 (2000)
Steiger, J.H.: EzPATH: A Supplementary Module for SYSTAT and SYGRAPH. SYSTAT, Evanston (1989)
Steiger, J.H.: Driving fast in reverse: the relationship between software development, theory, and education
in structural equation modeling. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 96, 331–338 (2001)
Steiger, J.H., Lind, J.C.: Statistically-based tests for the number of common factors. In: Presentation at the
Annual Meetings of the Psychometric Society, Iowa City (1980)
Stephenson, M.T., Holbert, R.L., Zimmerman, R.S.: On the use of structural equation modeling in health
communication research. Health Commun. 20, 159–167 (2006)
Steyer, R.: Analyzing individual and average causal effects via structural equation models. Methodology 1,
39–54 (2005)
Tarka, P.: Marketing Research Effectiveness Conditions. Poznan University Press, Poznan (2017)

123

An overview of structural equation modeling: its beginnings…

353

TETRAD and SEM: Pearl. J. Multivar. Behav. Res. 33, 119–128 (1998)
Theil, H.: Repeated Least-Squares Applied to a Complete Equation Systems. Central Planning Bureau.
Mimeo, The Hague (1953a)
Theil, H.: Estimation and Simultaneous Correlation in Complete Equation Systems. Central Planning
Bureau. Mimeo, The Hague (1953b)
Theil, H.: Principles of Econometrics. Wiley, New York (1971)
Thompson, E.: Individual and couple utility of children. Demography 20, 507–518 (1983)
Thurstone, L.L.: The Vectors of Mind. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1935)
Thurstone, L.L.: Primary mental abilities. Psychometric Monographs 1, Psychometric Society, Richmond
(1938)
Thurstone, L.L.: Multiple Factor Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1947)
Tomarken, A.J., Weller, N.G.: Potential problems with well fitting models. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 112,
578–598 (2003)
Tomarken, A.J., Weller, N.G.: Structural equation modeling: strengths, limitations and misconceptions.
Annu. Rev. Clin. Res. 35, 469–499 (2005)
Tucker, L.R.: Determination of parameters of a functional relation by factor analysis. Psychometrika 23,
19–23 (1958)
Tucker, L.R.: Some mathematical notes on three-mode factor analysis. Psychometrika 31, 279–311 (1966)
Van de Schoot, R., Depaoli, S.: Bayesian analyses: where to start. Eur. Health Psychol. 16, 75–83 (2014)
Viswesvaran, C., Ones, D.S.: Theory testing: combining psychometric meta-analysis and structural equations modeling. Pers. Psychol. 48, 865–885 (1995)
Voelkle, M.C.: Reconsidering the use of autoregressive latent trajectory (ALT) models. Multivar. Behav.
Res. 43, 564–591 (2008)
Voelkle, M.C., Oud, J.H.L., Davidov, E., Schmidt, P.: An SEM approach to continuous time modeling of
panel data: relating authoritarianism and anomia. Psychol. Methods 17, 176–192 (2012)
Votaw, D.F.: Testing compound symmetry in a normal multivariate population. Ann. Math. Stat. 19,
189–196 (1948)
Wald, A.: A note of identification of economic relations. In: Koopmans, T.C. (ed.) Statistical Inference in
Dynamic Economic Models, pp. 238–244. Wiley, New York (1950)
Werts, C.E., Linn, R.L.: Path analysis: psychological examples. ETS Res. Bull. Ser. 2, 1–49 (1969)
Westland, J.C.: Lower bounds on sample size in structural equation modeling. Electron. Commer. Res.
Appl. 9, 476–487 (2010)
Westland, J.C.: Structural Equation Modeling: From Paths to Networks. Springer, New York (2015)
Wheaton, B.: The sociogenesis of psychological disorder. Am. Sociol. Rev. 43, 383–403 (1978)
Wheaton, B.: Models for the stress-buffering functions of coping resources. J. Health Soc. Behav. 26,
352–364 (1985)
Wheaton, B.: Assessment of fit in overidentified models with latent variables. In: Long, J.S. (ed.) Common
Problems/Poor Solutions: Avoiding Error in Quantitative Research. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills
(1988)
Wiley, D.E.: The identification problem for structural equation models with unmeasured variables. In:
Goldberger, A.S., Duncan, O.D. (eds.) Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences, pp. 69–83.
Academic Press, New York (1973)
Wilks, S.S.: Sample criteria for testing equality of means, equality of variances, and equality of covariances
in a normal multivariate distribution. Ann. Math. Stat. 17, 257–281 (1946)
Willett, J.B., Sayer, A.G.: Using covariance structure analysis to detect correlates and predictors of individual change over time. Psychol. Bull. 116, 363–381 (1994)
Winship, C., Mare, R.D.: Structural equations and path analysis for discrete data. Am. J. Sociol. 89, 54–110
(1983)
Wold, H.: Causal inferences from observational data: a review of end and means. J. R. Stat. Soc. A 119,
28–61 (1956)
Woodward, J.: Causal independence and faithfulness. Multivar. Behav. Res. 33, 129–148 (1998)
Wothke, W.: Nonpositive definite matrices in structural modeling. In: Bollen, K.A., Long, J.S. (eds.) Testing
Structural Equation Models, pp. 256–293. Sage Publications, Newbury Park (1993)
Wright, S.: On the nature of size factors. Genetics 3, 367–374 (1918)
Wright, S.: The relative importance of heredity and environment in determining the piebald pattern of
guinea-pigs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 6, 320–332 (1920)
Wright, S.: Correlation and causation. J. Agric. Res. 20, 557–585 (1921)
Wright, S.: The method of path coefficients. Ann. Math. Stat. 5, 161–215 (1934)
Wright, S.: Path coefficients and path regression: alternative or complementary concepts. Biometrics 16,
189–202 (1960a)

123

354

P. Tarka

Wright, S.: The treatment of reciprocal interactions with or without lag, in path analysis. Biometrics 16,
423–445 (1960b)
Yang, M., Dunson, D.B.: Bayesian semiparametric structural equation models with latent variables. Psychometrika 75, 675–693 (2010)
Yang-Wallentin, F., Schmidt, P., Davidov, E., Bamberg, S.: Is there any interaction effect between intention
and perceived behavioral control? Methods Psychol. Res. Online 8, 127–157 (2004)
Yuan, K.-H., Bentler, P.M.: Normal theory based test statistics in structural equation modeling. Br. J. Math.
Stat. Psychol. 51, 289–309 (1998)
Yuan, K.-H., Bentler, P.M.: A unified approach to multi-group structural equation modeling with nonstandard samples. In: Marcoulides, G.A., Schumacker, R.E. (eds.) Advanced Structural Equation Modeling: New Developments and Techniques, pp. 35–56. Erlbaum, Mahwah (2001)
Yuan, K.-H., Bentler, P.M.: Structural equation modeling. In: Rao, C.R., Sinharay, S. (eds.) Handbook of
Statistics, pp. 297–358. North-Holland, Amsterdam (2007)
Yuan, K.-H., Chan, W.: Measurement invariance via multi-group SEM: issues and solutions with Chisquare-difference tests. Psychol. Methods 21, 405–426 (2016)
Yuan, K.-H., Chan, W., Marcoulides, G.A., Bentler, P.M.: Assessing structural equation models by
equivalence testing with adjusted fit indexes. Struct. Equ. Model. 23, 319–330 (2016)
Yung, Y.-F., Bentler, P.M.: On added information for ML factor analysis with mean and covariance
structures. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 24, 1–20 (1986)
Zhang, Z., Hamagami, F., Wang, L., Grimm, K.J., Nesselroade, J.R.: Bayesian analysis of longitudinal data
using growth curve models. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 31, 374–383 (2007)

123

